 .                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03047 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 14, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Position (SF 86) for a position with his employer requiring access to classified 
information. On September 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
for foreign influence under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of 
the SOR on September 26, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 5, 2009. He admitted the seven factual 
allegations under Guideline B, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 14, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on January 14, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 
25, 2010, for a hearing on March 10, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered three exhibits, marked Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 3, 
1 
 
2 
 
which were received without objection. Applicant did not submit any exhibits, but 
testified on his own behalf. I kept the record open for Applicant to submit documents 
concerning his performance of duty with his employer. Applicant timely submitted his 
Performance Assessment and Development reviews for 2007, 2008, and 2009. (App. 
Ex. A through C, Performance Reviews) The Government had no objection to the 
admission of the performance reviews. (Gov. Ex. 4, Memorandum, dated March 15, 
2010) DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on March 22, 2010. Based on a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel submitted formal requests that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Israel, Jordan, Palestine, and Columbia. The requests and 
attached supporting documents were not admitted into evidence but are included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibits. Applicant had no objection to the requests for administrative 
notice or the attached documents. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. (Tr. 8-9, 14-17, Hearing Exhibit I through IV)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations under 
Guideline B as raised in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old systems architect manager for a defense contractor. 
He was born in what is now called the West Bank in the Middle East. At the time he was 
born, the area was under the jurisdiction of Jordan. Applicant completed high school in 
the area, and went to Egypt to start his college studies in 1989. He came to the United 
States in 1993 for his final year of college. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in 
Electrical Engineering from a United States university in 1994. He also earned a Master 
of Computer Science degree at a United States university in 2000 while working full-
time for the defense contractor. He has been working on a Doctoral Degree in Industrial 
Engineering from a United States university since 2002. He anticipates taking his 
comprehensive examination prior to submitting his dissertation topic this summer. After 
receiving his Bachelor of Science degree, he worked in an electronics store from 1994 
until he was hired by his defense contractor employer in 1997. He has been employed 
by the defense contractor for the last 12 years. (Tr. 18-21, 28-30; Gov. Ex. 1, SF 86, 
dated November 14, 2007) Applicant's performance with his employer has been 
excellent. He has been rated as a high contributor. He is noted for having excellent 
systems integration and team leadership skills. He is willing to go the extra mile and 
exceeds key objectives and expectations. He is rated as a can-do self-starter who is 
continually improving. (App. Ex.  A through C, Performance Reviews. 2007, 2008, 2009) 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1993 at the age of 25. He became a 
United States citizen at his first opportunity in February 2007. When Applicant came to 
the United States, he traveled on a Jordanian passport. At that time, the people from his 
3 
 
area of the Middle East were under the jurisdiction of Jordan. If anyone required a 
passport, it was issued by Jordan. Applicant received a Jordanian passport because he 
planned to study abroad. Applicant has never been an Israeli citizen. He has not been a 
Palestinian citizen since that country or authority did not exist when he lived in his home 
area. Applicant received a United States passport when he became a United States 
citizen in 2007. On his 2007 security clearance application, Applicant noted that he was 
a dual citizen of the United States and Jordan. At the same time he completed the 
application, he gave his Jordanian passport to his facility security officer and it was 
destroyed. Applicant does not know of a formal procedure to renounce his Jordanian 
citizenship, but believes he renounced Jordanian citizenship when he destroyed his 
Jordanian passport. He now considers himself exclusively a United States citizen. (Tr. 
21-26, 49-51, 58-60; Gov. Ex. 3, Destruction Certificate, dated November 12, 2007)  
 
 Applicant's immediate family still resides in the area where he was born and 
raised. It is a small town of about 5,000 to 6,000 people. Like most small towns, 
everyone knows everybody. His mother died in 1990. His father is 80 years old, not 
literate, and farms the same small plot he has farmed all of his life. Applicant talks to his 
father about once a week. (Tr. 30-32) Applicant has three brothers and four sisters. One 
brother is deceased. His oldest brother lives in Jordan and is a supervisor in a clothes 
manufacturing business. He talks to this brother about once a month. (Tr. 32) His other 
brother is a pharmacy assistant who lives in the house with his father. He has 
occasional contact with this brother when he calls his father. (Tr. 33-36) One sister also 
lives in the house with his father and he talks to her occasionally when he talks to his 
father. His other three sisters are married and live close to his father. One brother-in-law 
is deceased, and the other two work in construction. He talks to his sisters about once a 
month. (Tr. 36-38) He considers his relationship with his family to be close (Tr. 53-54) 
Applicant does not own property in Palestine. He does not know if he is entitled to 
inherit his father's property in Palestine. At most, he would share the rights to the 
property with his brothers and sisters. All of Applicant's property and resources are in 
the United States. He owns his own house in the United States. (Tr. 43-47) 
 
 Applicant made two trips back to his home area in the West Bank, in 1998 and 
2007, since leaving for school in 1993. (Tr. 52-53) Applicant has no special plans to visit 
his family since such a trip is very expensive. Applicant has sent his father funds to 
assist him particularly with medical care. Applicant believes that over the years he 
probably sent his father a few thousand dollars. Applicant's family sacrificed to send him 
to school, so he feels an obligation to assist his father. He recently sent about $300 to 
assist with medical expenses. (Tr. 43-45) 
 
 Applicant was married to a United States citizen when he was attending college, 
but the marriage only lasted one year. He married again in 1997, shortly before starting 
work with the defense contractor. His second and present wife was born and raised in 
Columbia, but came to the United States to work and has a permanent resident green 
card. Her application fro United States citizenship is pending. They have two children 
who are United States citizens and attend the local schools. They participate in the 
normal activities for children in the United States. His wife's father is deceased. Her 
mother and three of her four brothers are citizens and residents of Columbia. His 
4 
 
mother-in-law is a retired school teacher in her 80s. She visits Applicant and his family 
for a few months almost every year. In fact, she had just left to return home shortly 
before the hearing. He does not talk to her very much since her only language is 
Spanish and Applicant does not speak Spanish. One of his brothers-in-law is a citizen 
and resident of the United States who is working as a hospital pharmacist. One of his 
brothers-in-law is a senior officer in the Columbian military. Applicant sees him a few 
times a year when he comes to the United States on military business. His other two 
brothers-in-law frequently visit the United States. One is a college dean, and the other is 
an architect. His wife's family is financially independent and does not need any financial 
support from him or his wife. Applicant has made only one trip to Columbia, and has no 
plans to make a trip in the future. (Tr. 26-29, 38-45, 53-54)   
 
 In Guideline B cases, the identity and nature of the country where foreign 
contacts are located must be considered. In this case, Jordan must be considered 
because one of Applicant's brothers resides in Jordan. Palestine and Israel must be 
considered since both have some interest in and control of the West Bank area where 
Applicant's family is located. Columbia must be considered because of the location of 
Applicant's wife's family. 
 
 Jordan is an ally of the United States, and the two countries have enjoyed close 
relations for over 60 years. Jordan has a constitutional monarchy form of government 
and a developing economy. There are some human rights issues in Jordan as well as a 
continuing threat of terrorism. Jordan continues to aggressively pursue terrorist in the 
country. Jordan also treats individual with dual United States and Jordanian citizenship 
as if they were only Jordanian citizens. Dual citizens are subject to the same obligations 
to the country as ordinary citizens. (See, Hearing Exhibit I, United States Department of 
State, Background Note, Jordan, dated February 2009) 
 
 The control and governance of the West Bank area where Applicant was born 
and raised and where his family still lives has been disputed by Jews and Arabs since 
the beginning of the Twentieth century. The area called Palestine was created after 
World War I and was under the control of a British Mandate. Even with the British 
Mandate, the control and governance of the area continued to be contested. After World 
War II, the British withdrew and the Jewish people in the area proclaimed the 
independent state of Israel. Some of the Arab population moved to Jordan or the West 
Bank. An Arab nationalist organization, the Palestine Liberation Organization, was 
established in 1967 and pushed for Arab national liberation and was recognized in the 
Arab community as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. In 1967, 
Israel took control of a large part of the contested area, to include the West Bank, and 
the Arabs in the area came under the control of Israel. The conflict between the 
Palestinians and the Israelis continued through the 1960s and 1970s. In the 1980s, the 
conflict intensified. In 1988, Jordan ceded all of its claims to the territory. Israel withdrew 
from part of the contested area but continued to occupy the West Bank. The conflicts in 
the area continue today. 
 
 Fatah, the Arab nationalist political party, dominated the PLO from its founding in 
1969 until the death of its long time leader in 2004. In 2006, Hamas, a religious and 
5 
 
political organization formed around Palestinian nationalism and Islamic 
fundamentalism took over control of Fatah. They called for the destruction of Israel and 
the establishment of an Islamic state in Palestine. It rejected peace accords and waged 
intermittent terror attacks to undermine peace efforts. Hamas was designated by the 
United States Department of State as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO). There are 
also other Palestinian groups labeled as FTO by the United States. In June 2007, in-
fighting between Fatah and Hamas led to Hamas controlling the Gaza strip and Fatah 
the West Bank. The area continues to remain unstable. The United States urges its 
citizens to exercise caution when traveling to the West Bank and avoid travel to Gaza. 
There are reports the Palestinian authorities resort to torture, arbitrary and prolonged 
detention, corruption, and other human rights violations. United States citizens have 
been injured or killed in the area. Foreigners, including Americans, have been 
kidnapped to use as bartering tools. The threat of hostage taking remains a primary 
concern for Americans and foreigners in the area. 
 
 Israel is the United States' largest trading partner, and has a technologically 
advanced economy. While the relationship between the United States and Israel is 
close, there are some serious issues. The United States is concerned about Israel's 
sale of sensitive equipment and technologies to other counties, its active collection of 
proprietary information, including from the United States, and the illegal export of 
controlled technologies from the United States to Israel. (See, Hearing Exhibit II, 
Congressional Research Service Report for Congress, The Palestinian Territories; 
Background and U.S. Relations, October 12, 2007; hearing Exhibit III, United States 
Department of State, Background Notes, Israel, October 2007). 
 
 Columbia is the second largest country in South America and has a 
constitutional, multi-party democracy. United States citizens are warned of the dangers 
of traveling to Columbia because of violence from narco-terrorists groups. There is a 
potential for violence by terrorists in all parts of the country. The terrorist organizations 
continue to kidnap and hold people of all nationalities and occupations to use as barter 
and bargaining chips. Numerous organizations in Columbia have been designated by 
the United States as FTOs. The largest, Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia 
(FARC), carries out bombings in urban area targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, 
government officials, politicians, and soldiers. While there are improvements, serious 
human rights issues remain. (See, Hearing Exhibit IV, United States Department of 
State, Country Report, Western Hemisphere Overview, April 30, 2009). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
6 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant's wife resides with him and their two children in the United States. She 
is a permanent resident alien with a green card, and has applied for United States 
citizenship. Her Columbia citizenship does not create a security concern because she 
7 
 
lives with her family in the United States, her husband and children are United States 
citizens, and her application for citizenship is pending.  
 
 The citizenship of Applicant's father and siblings still residing in the West Bank is 
uncertain. They could be citizens of Palestine, Jordan, or Israel. The exact citizenship of 
his family does not affect the determination of Applicant's access to classified 
information. Their location in the West Bank is what creates the security concern. 
Applicant has frequent and extensive contact with his father and siblings in the West 
Bank. He talks to his father and the siblings living with his father almost weekly, He talks 
to his other siblings in the area monthly. He sends his father money to assist with his 
medical care. Applicant also has monthly telephone contact with his brother in Jordan. 
Even though he has returned to the West Bank only twice since leaving, the latest in 
2007, he admits he has a close relationship with his family. Applicant's contact with his 
family in the Middle East raises security concerns under Foreign Influence Disqualifying 
Conditions (FI DC) AG ¶ 7(a) (Contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion); and FI DC AG ¶ 7(b) (Connections to a foreign 
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information).  
  
 Applicant does not have the same level of contact with his wife's family members 
who are citizens and residents of Columbia because they do not speak the same 
language. He sees his in-laws only when they visit the United States. However, his wife 
has a close relationship with her mother and siblings in Columbia. His wife's relationship 
with her family raises FC DC AG ¶ 7(d) (sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion). 
 
 The mere existence of a foreign family member is not sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. As Applicant repeatedly pointed out in the hearing, a lot 
of people have family members in foreign countries and they cannot change the place 
of their origin. The nature of Applicant’s contact with his family members in the West 
Bank and Jordan, and with his in-laws in Columbia must be examined to determine 
whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative term denoting increased risk compared 
to some normally existing risk that can be inherent anytime a family member lives 
subject to a foreign government. The facts that heighten the risk for Applicant in the 
West Bank, Jordan, and Columbia are the extensive human rights abuses, terrorist 
activities, and the on-going conflict and struggle for control of the West Bank area.  
 
 In support of being granted access to classified information, Applicant raised 
facts to mitigate the security concerns for his family in the West Bank, Jordan, and 
Columbia. I have considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) AG ¶ 8(a) 
(The nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
8 
 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.); FI MC AG ¶ 8(b) (There is no conflict of interest, either because 
the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, 
or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest); and FI MC AG ¶ 8(c) (Contact or communication 
with foreign citizens is so casual or infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation). 
 
 Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.” The underlying premise was 
that an applicant should not be placed in a position where he or she is forced to make a 
choice between the interest of the family member and the interest of the United States. 
There was no balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk. Under the new 
guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to determine if 
an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the United States 
interest.  
 
 The nature of the human rights abuses, terrorist threats, and conflicts in the West 
Bank and Columbia places a more significant burden on Applicant in mitigating the 
disqualifying conditions and the security concerns. The nature of the government in 
Jordan and the efforts by the government to fight and control terrorism places less of a 
burden on Applicant concerning his relationship with his brother in Jordan. Applicant's 
relationship with his family is close, but the relationship with his wife's family is not 
close. He talks weekly to his father and sends him funds for medical needs. He talks to 
his siblings living with his father when he calls his father. He talks to his other sisters 
and his brother in Jordan monthly. His wife talks to her family frequently, but he does 
not talk to them. His relationships with his family in West Bank and Jordan are close and 
not casual so Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between his 
family members and the interests of the United States. The nature of the fluctuating 
political situation, the terrorist threats, and threat of kidnappings in the West Bank 
places him in a position where he would be forced to chose between his family 
members in the West Bank and the interests of the United States. The strong 
government in Jordan and its close relationship with the United States will not place him 
in a position to chose between his brother there and the interest of the United States. 
His relationship with his wife's family is not close since he rarely talks to them except 
when they infrequently visit him. It is unlikely he would be placed in a position to help or 
provide support to an organization in Columbia over the interests of the United States. 
In regard to Jordan and Columbia, there is no heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
manipulation, pressure, of coercion, or conflict of interest between his obligation to the 
United States and his contacts in Jordan or Columbia. Accordingly, FI MC AG ¶ 8(a) 
and FI MC AG ¶ 8(c) do not apply to Applicant's father and siblings in the West Bank, 
but do apply to his wife's family in Columbia and his brother in Jordan.  
 
9 
 
 Applicant has little, if any, sense of loyalty to the authorities or governments in 
the West Bank. He spent his early years on the West Bank but left for school and has 
only returned twice in over 17 years. Some of the governing factions were not even in 
existence when he left. He came to this country for education and remained to raise a 
family and work in his chosen profession. He became a United States citizen as soon as 
he could, and has been very successful working for his employer. He is highly regarded 
by them. The United States has offered him freedom, justice, tolerance, and an 
opportunity to reach his potential. His family in the West Bank does not enjoy these 
benefits. While he provided funds to assist his father, he sent the funds as a dutiful son 
and not to assist the government of the West Bank or any terrorist element in the 
country.  
 
 While Applicant's loyalty to the United States is strong, he has an equally strong 
loyalty to his family in the West Bank. There may be a conflict of interest between his 
loyalty to his family and his loyalty to the United States. In balancing all of the factors 
mentioned and considered above, I am not satisfied Applicant’s loyalty to the United 
States as opposed to his loyalty to his family is such that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest. The same cannot be said 
for his wife's family in Columbia. He has little if any sense of loyalty to Columbia or his 
wife's family. He only visited the country once, and only sees his in-laws when they visit 
him in the United States. The language barrier between them is a hindrance to 
establishing a sense of personal loyalty. Applicant's wife is close to her family, but 
Applicant's contact with them is so minimal there is no heightened risk or conflict of 
interest between his loyalty to them and his loyalty to the United States. FI MC AG ¶ 
8(b) does not apply to his family in the West Bank but does apply to his wife's family in 
Columbia. Applicant has not met his burden to show that his contact with his family in 
the West Bank does not cause a security concern. He has met his burden to establish 
his wife's family in Columbia and his brother in Jordan does not cause a security 
concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
10 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant, not a single item in isolation, 
to reach a determination concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant has a close relationship with his family in the West Bank. There is 
extensive terrorist activity in that area and it is an area in which major terrorist 
organizations operate. These simple facts alone might be sufficient to raise security 
concerns for Applicant’s vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. However, 
mere family ties with people in a foreign country are not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. Whether an applicant’s family ties in a foreign country 
pose a security risk depends on an evaluation of the overall facts and circumstances of 
the family ties, and the heightened risks involved in that area.   
 
Applicant has strong loyalties to the United States, and has no loyalties to any 
government or organization, terrorist or otherwise, in the West Bank. However, the 
decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a strict determination of an 
applicant's loyalty. Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access to classified 
information. The nature of the governance and terrorist threats on the West Bank and 
the potential for exploitation of his family members living there outweigh his loyalty to 
the United States. Applicant's access to classified information is decided not on the 
basis of his loyalty to the United States but the geography, history, and politics of the 
area where his family resides. Applicant's family in the West Bank creates a heightened 
risk related to national security. Because of these factors, Applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines established for the grant of eligibility for access to classified information. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not met his burden of mitigating all 
potential security concerns arising from his family in the West Bank. He has met his 
burden concerning his wife's family in Columbia and his brother in Jordan. Overall, on 
balance, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance because of his family in the West Bank. 
Accordingly, I find against Applicant and he is not granted access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGANST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
11 
 
   Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
