 Exhibit 2 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-09008
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. He resolved an unpaid judgment of more
than $10,000 in 2013. He did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the foreign influence concern based on his family ties to South
Korea. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on April 10, 2012.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal Board6
restated existing caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
2
(DOD),  on June 12, 2015, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it2
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline B
for foreign influence and Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR in a July 20, 2015 response wherein he admitted
the SOR allegations, and he provided reliable, documentary proof that the unpaid
judgment of $10,678, which was obtained in 2007, was settled and then released in
December 2013. Because the unpaid judgment is the sole matter under Guideline F, the
financial considerations concern is decided in Applicant’s favor, without further
discussion, based on Applicant’s resolution of this debt about  18 months before the
SOR was issued. 
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case
will be decided on the written record.  On September 2, 2015, Department Counsel4
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This5
so-called file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on
September 29, 2015. Applicant did not reply within 30 days from receipt of the FORM.
The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015.    
Rulings on Evidence and Procedural Matters
Exhibit 3 is a set of interrogatories, answered by Applicant, that includes a report
of investigation (ROI) from Applicant’s background investigation. That document is a
summary of an interview of Applicant conducted on July 3, 2012. An ROI may be
received and considered as evidence when it is authenticated by a witness.  Here, the6
ROI appears to be properly authenticated based on Applicant’s answers to the
interrogatories, the ROI is admissible, and I have considered it.
 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(c). 7
 The findings of fact are based on information found in Exhibits 2, 3, and 4. 8
3
Exhibit 4 is Department Counsel’s request to take administrative or official notice
of certain facts concerning the country of South Korea. The request is in good order,
Applicant has not responded to it, the request is granted, and the relevant facts are
discussed below. 
In addition, I am sua sponte taking notice of certain easily verifiable, indisputable
facts about U.S.–South Korean relations, which is an important aspect in a Guideline B
case. The facts are uncontroversial and should come as no surprise to a reasonably
well informed person. Doing so at this point in the proceeding without notice to the
parties does not result in undue surprise or unfairness, because the facts are so
indisputably settled. Doing so is also consistent with the requirement to make an overall
commonsense judgment.  Those facts are discussed below. 7
Findings of Fact8
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security clearance
for the first time. His educational background includes earning a doctorate’s degree
from a U.S. university in 1996. He is employed as a senior scientist for a technology
company doing business in aerospace and defense. 
1. Applicant’s background in South Korea and immigration to the United
States
Applicant was born and raised in South Korea. He attended and completed a
South Korean high school during 1979–1982. He attended and completed a bachelor’s
degree at a South Korean university during 1982–1986. He then attended and
completed a master’s degree at a South Korean university during 1986–1988. He
completed mandatory military service as a second lieutenant in the South Korean Army
during 1988–1989. 
Applicant married his South Korean spouse in May 1990. A few months later in
August 1990, he immigrated to the United States to pursue his doctorate’s degree at a
U.S. university. He completed the doctorate program in 1996, and he has worked for
his current employer since then.  
       
2. Applicant’s family ties to the United States and South Korea   
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009, and he obtained a U.S.
passport that same year. His spouse remains a South Korean citizen, but she resides in
the United States as a permanent resident alien. His spouse is a homemaker and is not
otherwise employed. As far as Applicant knows, his spouse does not intend to become
 Exhibit 3 at 3. 9
 Exhibit 2. 10
 Exhibit 3 (financial interrogatories). 11
 Exhibit 3. 12
 This paragraph contains the facts that I sua sponte took notice of.13
4
a U.S. citizen. They have two children who are native-born U.S. citizens, both of whom
are less than 18 years of age. 
Applicant has no ongoing contact with any person in South Korea except for his
immediate family members who are all citizens of and residents in South Korea.
Applicant’s father has been deceased for many years, but his mother is a homemaker.
He also has a brother, sister, and mother-in-law in South Korea. Like Applicant, his
brother performed mandatory military service in the South Korean Army. His brother is
employed as a high school teacher. His sister is employed as a part-time meter reader.
Like his mother, his mother-in-law is a homemaker. 
I am unable to determine the frequency or nature of the contact Applicant has
with his family members in South Korea, because he indicated in his response to the
interrogatories that particular information was not correct.  Applicant did not provide any9
additional or amplifying information about his family members when he answered the
SOR or in response to the FORM. According to his security clearance application, his
last trip to South Korea to visit his family was in 2007, which was before he became a
U.S. citizen.10
3. Applicant’s financial interests in the United States and South Korea
Applicant has no financial, business, real estate, or pecuniary interests in South
Korea, and all such interests are in the United States.  He has a net worth of about11
$150,000.    12
4. Background information on South Korea
Relations between South Korea (officially the Republic of Korea) and the United
States have been extensive since about 1950, when the United States fought on South
Korea’s side in the Korean War during 1950–1953. Since then, the two nations have
developed strong economic, diplomatic, and military ties. The two countries have had a
military alliance since 1953. More than 25,000 soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines are
now stationed in South Korea as part of United States Forces Korea, and act as a
forward presence in the region. In 1989, President George H. W. Bush designated
South Korea as a major non-NATO ally. It is a designation given by the U.S.
Government to close allies who have strategic working relationships with the U.S.
armed forces but are not members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).   13
 This paragraph contains the facts that I took notice of per Department Counsel’s written request. 14
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to15
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
5
South Korea has a history of collecting protected U.S. information. In the past, it
has been ranked as one of the seven counties most actively engaged in foreign
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States. Those activities
have resulted in several U.S. criminal prosecutions. The South Korean government
generally respects the human rights of its citizens. But reported human-rights problems
include: (1) the government’s interpretation of national security and other laws limiting
freedom of expression and restricting access to the Internet; (2) official corruption; (3)
the lack of a comprehensive anti-discrimination law; (4) sexual and domestic violence;
(5) child prostitution; and (6) trafficking in persons.14
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As15
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt16
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An17
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  18
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting19
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An20
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 23
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).24
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.25
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 26
 AG ¶ 6. 27
6
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme22
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.23
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.24
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it25
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s ties to South
Korea disqualify him from eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline
B for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into26
doubt due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.27
7
I have considered the following disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
in my analysis of Applicant’s family ties to South Korea:
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information; 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, although South Korea is a close ally and great friend of the United States,
based on  concerns about (1) industrial and economic espionage, and (2) reported
human-rights problems, South Korea meets the heightened-risk standard in AG ¶ 7(a).  
Applicant’s family ties to South Korea are sufficient to raise a potential
vulnerability to foreign influence. Although his wife and two children (both of whom are
native-born U.S. citizens) live in the United States, Applicant’s mother, two siblings, and
mother-in-law are citizens of and residents in South Korea. None of his family members
or in-laws in South Korea have a job or position that is particularly troubling, but his
family ties to South Korea are sufficient to justify further review. 
Applicant is a senior scientist for a U.S. technology company. He has lived,
studied, and worked in the United States since 1990, a period of about 25 years. He
has been a U.S. citizen since 2009, a period of less than seven. His spouse is a U.S.
permanent resident alien, but she does not intend to become a U.S. citizen. He and his
spouse have two children who are native-born U.S. citizens. His financial interests are
in the United States. The strength or weakness of his ties or connections to his family
members in South Korea is difficult to determine given the available information. But I
presume that Applicant has bonds of affection or obligation or both toward his
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).28
8
immediate family members in South Korea. Taken together, his family, employment,
and financial ties to the United States are reasonably strong.    
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has family ties to South Korea. Those circumstances cannot
be dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic, especially considering the matters
the United States views of concern in South Korea. On balance, I am not satisfied that a
security concern or potential conflict of interest presented by his family ties to South
Korea is outweighed and overcome by his ties to the United States. The record
evidence is not strong enough to allow me to have confidence that Applicant can be
expected to resolve any such concern or potential conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest. His family ties to South Korea preclude a conclusion that he has the necessary
freedom from foreign influence required to have access to classified information.   
Because Applicant chose to have his case decided without a hearing, I am
unable to evaluate his demeanor. Limited to the written record, I am unable to assess
his sincerity, candor, or truthfulness. He also chose not to respond to the FORM with
relevant and material facts about his circumstances, which may have helped to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. 
Applicant’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, due to his family ties to
South Korea, creates doubt about his reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and
ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person
concept.  Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of28
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a, b, c, e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
