 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09672 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for foreign preference 
under Guideline C. HEligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with a defense contractor on 
May 4, 2012 (Item 6), and October 1, 2013 (Item 4). On January 14, 2014, Applicant 
was interviewed by a security investigator from the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM). (Item 5) After reviewing the results of the interview, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
April 28, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B and foreign preference under 
Guideline C. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 17, 2015. He admitted all allegations under 
both guidelines. He elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 3) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 25, 2015. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on September 29, 2015, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. He did not provide any additional 
information in response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on December 1, 2015.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM agent (Item 5) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the Personnel Subject Interview summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, 
so he waived any objection to the admissibility of the Personal Subject Interview 
summary. I will consider information in the Personal Subject Interview in my decision. 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning Taiwan, and provided references for U.S. Department of State documents, 
court decisions, reports to Congress, and U.S. Department of Commerce documents 
concerning Taiwan. (Item 7) I will take administrative notice of facts concerning Taiwan 
as noted in my Findings of Fact.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He was born and educated in Taiwan, receiving a 
bachelor’s degree in 1992, and a master’s degree in 2004 from Taiwanese universities. 
He served the compulsory two years of military service for Taiwan from July 1981 to 
July 1983. He married in Taiwan on June 25, 2001. He and his wife separated on 
February 16, 2013. He shares custody of their two children with his wife. Applicant 
entered the United States on August 8, 2003. Applicant became a United States citizen 
on December 11, 2008. He received a United States passport on January 5, 2009. He 
has been employed as a data base architect by his present defense contractor 
employer since October 2013. Prior to this employment, he worked for various defense 
contractors as a data base analyst since May 2005. (Item 4, e-QIP, dated October 1, 
 
3 
 
 
2013; Item 4, Interview Summary, dated January 14, 2014; Item 6, e-QIP, dated May 4, 
2012)  
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline C that Applicant, after being granted United 
States citizenship in December 2008, applied for and was issued a Taiwanese passport 
on February 23, 2012, with expiration date of February 23, 2022. The SOR alleges 
under Guideline B that Applicant’s father, mother, sister, brother (SOR 2.a), and mother-
in-law (SOR 2.d) are citizens of Taiwan residing in Taiwan. Under Guideline B, it is 
alleged that Applicant’s spouse and children are dual citizens of Taiwan and the United 
States residing in the United States. (SOR 2.b) It is further alleged that Applicant has a 
sister who is a citizen of Taiwan but resides in the United States with an Alien 
Registration Card (SOR 2.c). Applicant admitted the foreign preference and foreign 
influence allegations. (Item 3, Response to SOR; dated June 17, 2015) 
 
Applicant admits in his e-QIPs and the personal subject interview that he is a 
dual citizen of Taiwan and the United States, and that he possesses a Taiwanese 
passport issued on February 23, 2012, with expiration date of February 23, 2022. He 
uses the passport to ease his travels to Taiwan. Applicant travels to Taiwan 
approximately every two years to visit his family. He traveled to Taiwan in 2005, 2008, 
2009, and 2012. Applicant stated that he would be willing to renounce dual citizenship 
and his passport if required. He has not presented any information to show he 
renounced his Taiwanese citizenship or relinquished control of the passport. (Item 4, e-
QIP, dated October 1, 2013; Item 5, Report of Personal Subject Interview, dated 
January 14, 2014, at 1; item 6, e-QIP, dated May 4, 2012) 
 
Applicant admits that his father, mother, sister, brother, and mother-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant’s father is a retired businessman having 
owned a manufacturing company. His mother is a retired government contractor 
employee in environmental protection and recycling programs. They have no affiliation 
with the Taiwanese government. He talks to them both weekly on skype. (Item 5, 
Personal Subject Interview, dated January 17, 2014 at 2) 
 
Applicant’s brother is a resident and citizen of Taiwan and is employed as an 
engineer. Applicant has one sister who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan and is 
unemployed. His siblings in Taiwan have no connection to the government. He talks to 
them frequently in December and January each year as they celebrate his parents’ 
birthdays, Christmas, and the Chinese New Year. He speaks to them quarterly the rest 
of the year. In response to the SOR, he admits he has a sister that is a citizen of Taiwan 
but resides in the United States with an alien registration (green card). In the personal 
subject interview, which preceded the SOR, she is listed as a resident of Taiwan. Since 
the SOR is the latest document, I conclude that his sister now resides in the United 
States as alleged in SOR 2.c. There is no information in the file concerning his mother-
in-law.  
 
 During World War II and after, a civil war was fought on the mainland of China 
between the Chinese Communist Party and the Nationalist Chinese. In 1949, the 
 
4 
 
 
Chinese Communist party was victorious and established a government on the 
mainland. The Nationalist Chinese fled to the island that is now Taiwan and established 
a government. Taiwan has developed steadily since then and is now the world’s 17th 
largest economy. Taiwan became a member of the World Trade Organization in 2002, 
further expanding its trade opportunities and further strengthening its standing in the 
global economy. This prosperity established economic and social stability. 
 
 Until 1968, Taiwan’s political system was effectively controlled by one party, the 
Kuomintang. Since ending martial law in 1987, Taiwan has taken dramatic steps to 
improve respect for human rights and created a democratic political system. The United 
States has been committed to maintaining cultural, commercial, and other nonofficial 
relations with Taiwan since January 1979, when it formally recognized the government 
of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) as the sole legal government of China. By 
formal act of Congress (Taiwan Relations Act of 1979), the United States is committed 
to provide Taiwan with military defensive arms in support of Taiwan’s security and 
stability in the region. The United States also stated it would maintain cultural, 
commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan. Despite the United 
States clear and consistent position that Taiwan and the mainland are part of one 
China, the United States expanded commercial ties with Taiwan and is supportive of 
Taiwan’s membership in international organizations, such as the World Trade 
Organization and the Asian Development Bank. (See, United States Department of 
State Background Notes: Taiwan, dated November 3, 2010) 
 
 The Government claims in its request for Administrative Notice that Taiwan 
poses a threat to national security because in the past, it was one of the countries most 
actively engaged in industrial espionage and the collection of foreign economic 
information. The request cites to the annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage of 2000. The report lists Taiwan as one of the most 
active collectors of industrial and economic intelligence. However, the Government also 
noted the more recent Annual report from 2008. That report does not list Taiwan as 
being one of the biggest collectors of economic and industrial espionage. It does list the 
PRC and Russia as the most active collectors. The report states the United States is 
targeted by a large number of foreign countries for economic and industrial espionage. 
The report notes that the Taiwan private sector is the most active collector of this type of 
economic and industrial intelligence, but there is ample evidence that foreign 
intelligence services and other government organizations remain aggressive in 
collecting information by using the private sector to collect information for them and by 
their own continued direct intelligence gathering operations. 
 
 The report lists a number of factors that could cause concern for the United 
States. Among the concerns are the numbers of foreign visitors from any country to 
Untied States sensitive sites, the numbers of non-immigrant persons from a country that 
are admitted as visitors to the United States, and the number of requests from a country 
for visits to military and defense industry sites. There are a large number of visitors from 
Taiwan to the United States for business, pleasure, or other purposes. Taiwan does not 
 
5 
 
 
appear to be any more active in the collection of economic and industrial intelligence 
than many other allied countries. 
 
 The Government noted information concerning individuals in the United States 
convicted of engaging in espionage practices on behalf of Taiwanese companies or 
officials, as well as companies that violated export control requirements in sending 
items to Taiwan. Some of these cases involve individuals in the United States, both 
native born and foreign born and both citizens and non-citizens of the United States, 
that formed friendships with Taiwan intelligence agents and then provided the agents 
with classified information. While the Government presented information only on Taiwan 
cases, it is not difficult to assume that there are cases that pertain to other countries as 
well. The fact that there are cases of Taiwan intelligence agents accepting intelligence 
information from sources in the United States, no matter how obtained, does raise 
security concerns. 
 
 The relationship between the United States and Taiwan is defined in the Taiwan 
Relations Act which recognizes Taiwan. (Public Law 96-8) Taiwan has a long history of 
friendly relations with the United States, including substantial levels of foreign trade. 
Taiwan is an ally and friend but can also pose a security threat because of its activities 
and efforts to obtain economic, industrial, and national security information.  
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. (AG ¶ 9) The principal 
goal of the foreign preference assessment is to determine the risk, based on foreign 
associations, that information may be compromised if access to sensitive information is 
granted. It is not a measure of Applicant’s loyalty to the United States. 
 
 Applicant was born in Taiwan and entered the United States with his wife and 
children using Taiwanese passports in 2003. He became a United States citizen in 
2008, and received a United States passport in 2009. In 2012, he applied for and 
received a new updated Taiwanese passport to use to ease his entry into Taiwan. The 
passport does not expire until 2023. These facts raise the following Foreign Preference 
Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 10 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; and  
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
I considered Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 11: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country);  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligation of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant was a U.S. citizen when he 
applied for and received a new Taiwanese passport. He indicated that he would 
renounce his dual citizenship with Taiwan and relinquish his Taiwanese passport. He 
has not taken either action. The Taiwanese passport is current and in his possession 
and not due to expire until 2022. While Applicant states he will always be a U.S. citizen, 
his seeking to renew his Taiwanese passport shows a potential preference for Taiwan. 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns for foreign preference. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States. Even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with 
the United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government and its relationship with the United States are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
 
8 
 
 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. 
  
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that his mother, father, brother, sister, 
and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. He admits that his wife and 
children are dual citizens of the United States and Taiwan but reside in the United 
States. He admits he has a sister who is a citizen of Taiwan but resides in the United 
States with an alien registration card.  
 
 Three disqualifying conditions are relevant to the security concerns raised in the 
SOR under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) requires substantial evidence of 
a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying 
conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the 
normal risk inherent in having a family member or contacts living under a foreign 
government. I find that Applicant’s family members who are residents of the United 
States do not create a “heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, or 
manipulation. Applicant’s parents and siblings who are citizens or residents of Taiwan 
are a foreign influence security concern for Applicant. Under AG ¶ 7(b), Applicant’s 
potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to determine if an applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.   
 
 The nature of Applicant’s contacts and relationships must be examined to 
determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. One factor that may heighten the risk in Applicant's 
case is Taiwan’s collection of economic and industrial intelligence and the potential use 
of Taiwanese citizens to obtain such information. The Government has established that 
Applicant may be under a “heightened risk” of security concern because of the 
 
9 
 
 
intelligence activities of the Taiwanese government and Taiwanese businesses to 
obtain industrial and commercial information. An applicant with foreign family or 
friendship ties to a country that presents a heightened risk has a heavy burden of 
persuasion to show that neither he nor the family members and friends are subject to 
influence by that country. The totality of an applicant’s family and friends ties to a 
foreign country as well as the tie to the country for each individual person must be 
considered. There is a potential risk presented because Applicant’s parents and siblings 
are either citizens or residents or Taiwan, and Taiwan is a known collector of 
intelligence information from foreigners.  
 
 Applicant raised facts to mitigate the security concerns arising from his parents 
and siblings connection to Taiwan. I have considered the following Foreign Influence 
Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from foreign countries.  
 
 In evaluating the potential conflict of interests between Applicant’s parents and 
siblings that are citizens and/or residents of Taiwan, I considered that Taiwan is a 
strong ally of the United States with mutual defense and strategic interests. It is a 
substantial trading partner of the United States. A friendly relationship is not 
determinative, but it makes it less likely that a foreign government would attempt to 
exploit a United States citizen through relatives or associates in that country. Even 
friendly countries may engage in espionage against the United States’ economic, 
scientific, or technical interest. Even though Taiwan is not a hostile country and its 
interests are not inimical to the United States, it is reasonable to consider that elements 
in Taiwan could take an action that may jeopardize their friendly position with the United 
States if they needed trade and defense information from sources in the United States. 
 
10 
 
 
There are strong indications that elements in Taiwan could seek economic and sensitive 
information from contacts in the United States.  
 
 I have considered Applicant’s relationship with his parents and siblings in 
Taiwan. Taiwan is not known to coerce their citizens to gain security information. 
Applicant talks to his parents weekly and to his siblings monthly. He visits them every 
two years. Thus the communications between Applicant and his family members are not 
casual or infrequent and it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
However, his parents are retired business people and his brother is an engineer. His 
sister is unemployed. In balancing all of the factors mentioned and considered above, I 
am satisfied that Applicant’s family members are not in positions that make it likely that 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
family members and the interests of the U.S. The mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 8(a) 
applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant, not single items in isolation, to 
reach a determination concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Applicant has frequent and close contact with his parents and siblings in Taiwan. 
However, they are not in positions that create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
manipulation, or inducement. However, Applicant applied for and received an updated 
current Taiwanese passport after he became a United States citizen. He has not 
relinquished control of that passport. Applicant’s actions concerning the passport 
 
11 
 
 
indicate that he has a preference for Taiwan. These facts leave me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to classified information. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has met the heavy burden of mitigating potential 
security concerns arising from parents and siblings in Taiwan. However, he has not 
mitigated security concerns arising from applying for and possessing a foreign passport. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
