1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-07410 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), H (Drug Involvement), and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 27, 
2012. On May 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F, H, and E. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated document and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 31, 
2015, and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on August 31, 2015. The 
case was reassigned to me on September 2, 2015, due to workload. The Defense 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 8, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for September 23, 2015. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until October 16, 2015, to 
enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on October 1, 2015. On October 16, 2015, at Applicant’s request, I 
extended the deadline for submitting additional evidence to October 26, 2015. Applicant 
timely submitted AX F through AX K, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.h, 1.j-1.r, 
1.u, 2.a-2.e, and 3.a-3.c. He denied 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.s, and 1.t. His admissions in 
his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old nuclear quality inspector and electrical designer 
employed by a defense contractor since November 2007. He received an associate’s 
degree in applied science in May 1994 and a bachelor’s degree in automated 
manufacturing technology in May 1999. (AX A.) He served in the U.S. Army from 
January 1976 to July 1977; but he was discharged before completing his term of 
service, receiving a general discharge under honorable conditions. He has never held a 
security clearance. (Tr. 8.) 
 
 Applicant married in July 2001, separated in September 2007, and divorced in 
November 2013. (Tr. 34.) He lived with a cohabitant from September 2011 to June 
2014, and his cohabitant shared the household expenses. (GX 3 at 7.) 
 
Applicant and his ex-wife had three children, ages 12, 10, and 6, during their 
marriage. He paid child support of $200-$300 per month until March 2008, when his 
child support was increased to $1,200 per month. His child-support obligation ended in 
June 2014, when he gained custody of his three children. He does not owe any child-
support arrearage. (GX 3 at 6; GX 4 at 3; AX K.) He has a 20-year-old son from a 
previous relationship, but has no child-support obligations for this child.  
 
 Applicant was convicted of felony possession of a controlled substance in July 
1977 and was placed on probation for one year. He was cited for possession of 
marijuana in April 1981 and paid a $25 fine. (GX 3 at 7; GX 4.) During a personal 
subject interview (PSI) in April 2012, he told the investigator that he purchased 
marijuana on the street and has grown his own marijuana, but has never supplied or 
sold it. He told an investigator that he stopped using marijuana in 2007 because of his 
work, but that he intended to resume his marijuana use when he stops working. (GX 3 
at 7.) In response to DOHA interrogatories in April 2015, he disclosed that he used 
marijuana “very rarely” from July 1975 to July 2007. (GX 3 at 10.) In his answer to the 
SOR and at the hearing, he recanted his admission that he used marijuana until 2007, 
and he testified that he stopped using marijuana in 2005. (Tr. 49-50.) 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted an SCA in February 2008. He answered “No” to the following 
question:  
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP,etc.)? 
 
Applicant did not disclose that his marijuana use continued until 2007. (GX 1 at 
31.) When he submitted another SCA in February 2012, he answered “No” to the 
question, “In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any drugs or controlled 
substance?” He again failed to disclose that his marijuana use continued until 2007. 
(GX 2 at 34.) 
 
 The 20 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are reflected in Applicant’s credit 
bureau reports from March 2012 and November 2014 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.t). The evidence 
concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
The two student loans for $38,399 and $37,599, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, 
have been consolidated and have been in a rehabilitation program since May 2015. The 
program requires Applicant to make nine consecutive $5.00 payments. He had made 
three payments as of the date of the hearing. (AX G.) 
 
 The same debt is alleged SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.s. (GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 2; Tr. 44.) It 
was satisfied by garnishment in January 2015. (AX H.) In April 2015, Applicant began 
making regular payments on the $1,950 debt to a furniture store, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d; 
and his payments were current as of the date of the hearing. (AX I.) Applicant made a 
$150 payment in April 2015 on the credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, a $60 
payment in August 2015, and a $25 payment in September 2015. (AX J.) 
 
 Applicant denied the past-due car loan in SOR ¶ 1.f and the unsatisfied judgment 
for unpaid rent in SOR ¶ 1.t, asserting that the debts were paid, but he provided no 
documentation to support his assertions. He admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g-
1.r, and he testified that he could not afford to make any payments on them. The 
medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n-1.r are all for less than $200.  (Tr. 41-43.) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in January 2002, which was 
dismissed. He testified that he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition because he lost 
his job as a network engineer and could not afford to pay his living expenses with the 
entry-level pay he earned as an installer. When he could not afford the monthly 
payments required under the Chapter 13 payment plan, he converted his bankruptcy to 
Chapter 7, and his debts were discharged. (Tr. 48, 64-66.) 
 
 Before Applicant separated from his wife in 2007, she was earning in the “mid 
30s.” Their combined income was about $85,000-$90,000. In November 2007, he 
4 
 
moved and changed jobs to be closer to his father. His income was reduced from about 
$55,000 per year to about $38,000 per year when he changed jobs. His annual income 
has since increased to about $43,000. (GX 1 at 11-12; Tr. 35-38.) 
 
 Applicant’s children are in private schools, because he was unhappy with the 
quality of the education they were receiving in public schools. His children’s tuition is 
about $5,500 per year. (Tr. 58.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he would have been able to resolve most of his delinquent 
debts if his $6,000 federal tax refund had not been seized. (Tr. 27; AX B.) He did not 
timely file his returns for 2010 through 2014 until 2015. When he submitted his previous 
SCA in February 2012, he answered “No” to a question asking if he had failed to file any 
federal or state tax returns “when required by law or ordinance.” (GX 2 at 36.) He 
testified that he believed that he had two years to file a return before any penalties were 
imposed. (Tr. 27-33.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
5 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.t) and a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.u.). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).1 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant experienced several conditions 
beyond his control: the break-up of his marriage, the subsequent breakup of his 
relationship with a cohabitant, and his pay reduction in in 2002. His pay reduction in 
November 2007 was not due to conditions beyond his control, because he voluntarily 
                                                          
1 AG ¶ 19(g) (“failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent 
filing of the same”) also would be relevant if the SOR had alleged it. Since it was not alleged, it may not 
be an independent basis for denying a security clearance. However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may 
be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is 
applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the unalleged conduct for 
these limited purposes. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
decided to move to a location nearer to his father, even though it substantially reduced 
his annual income. 
 
 The second prong of this mitigating condition, responsible conduct, is established 
for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d and 1.i and the bankruptcy alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.u, but not for the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant acted responsibly 
after he lost his job as a network engineer in 2002. He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition and began a payment plan, but could not afford the monthly payments. His 
resort to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy was a reasonable and responsible course of action 
under the circumstances. He has begun a rehabilitation program for the student loans in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, brought his payments up to date on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, and is 
making payments on the debt in SOR 1.i 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Except for any court-mandated financial 
counseling that would have been occurred in connection with his 2002 bankruptcy, 
Applicant has not sought or received financial counseling in connection with his current 
financial problems, and his financial situation is not under control. 
 
AG 20(d) is established for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.i. The “good 
faith” required for this mitigating condition means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant is in the 
process of rehabilitating his student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He has 
brought his payments up to date on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d and has made regular 
payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i.  
 
However, AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the remaining debts alleged in the 
SOR. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.s were satisfied by garnishment. Payment of a 
debt through garnishment rather than a voluntary effort diminishes its mitigating force. 
ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug.26, 2010). He claimed that he satisfied the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.t, but he provided no documentation to support his claim. He 
admitted that he has made no efforts to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g-1.r.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. He claimed that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.t were paid, but he 
submitted no documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana from high school to about 2007 
(SOR ¶ 2.a), grew marijuana (SOR ¶ 2.b), and intends to resume using marijuana (SOR 
¶ 2.c). It also alleges that he was convicted of felony possession of a controlled 
substance in about 1977 (SOR ¶ 2.d) and cited for possession of marijuana in 1981 
(SOR ¶ 2.e). 
 
8 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR, his statements during the PSI, 
and his testimony at the hearing established the following disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(h): expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to 
clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Neither mitigating condition is established. Although Applicant stopped using 
marijuana in 2007, his statements during the PSI and his testimony at the hearing made 
it clear that it intends to resume his marijuana use when he is no longer employed by 
the U.S. Government or a federal contractor. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCAs in February 2008 and 
February 2012 by deliberately failing to disclose his drug involvement (SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 
9 
 
3.b). It also cross-alleges SOR ¶ 2.c under this guideline (SOR ¶ 3.c). The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition for the allegation that Applicant falsified his 
SCAs is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification allegation is 
controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, 
standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s 
level of education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a 
failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was 
deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant is a well-educated, experienced adult. In his response to DOHA 
interrogatories in April 2015, he admitted using marijuana from July 1975 to July 2007. 
His admission was in his own handwriting and was consistent with his earlier admission 
during the April 2012 PSI. His recantation in answer to the SOR and at the hearing is 
not credible, and appears to be contrived to justify his failure to disclose his marijuana 
use in his 2012 SCA. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established.  
 
 The evidence of Applicant’s drug involvement establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
10 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) are not established. Applicant made no effort to correct 
his omissions from his two SCAs. His falsifications were not “minor,” because 
falsification of a security clearance application “strikes at the heart of the security 
clearance process.” ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App .Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) His falsifications 
were recent and did not happen under unique circumstances. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is not established. Applicant has acknowledged his drug use, but he 
has not acknowledged his falsifications. He has done nothing to change his behavior. 
To the contrary, he intends to continue his drug use. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established. Applicant has admitted his past drug involvement and 
has candidly admitted that he intends to continue it. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
11 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, H, 
and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems, drug 
involvement, and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.t:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.u:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:    Against Applicant 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
