1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 12-09997 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present information to mitigate 
financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), dated May 11, 2015, detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in DOD on September 1, 2006.  
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2015, admitting the ten delinquent 
debts in the SOR. He stated he paid or is paying on three of the debts (SOR 1.b, 1.c, 
and 1,j), did not know or forgot about six of the debts, (SOR 1.a, 1.d – 1.i). He provided 
no documentation to show any payments on the debts. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on July 31, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on August 31, 
2015. DOD issued a notice of hearing on October 22, 2015, scheduling a hearing for 
November 3, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered four 
exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4. Applicant testified but did not submit any exhibits. I received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 13, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is 47 years old and has been a painter in a shipyard since 2007. He is 
married with three adult children. His net monthly income is approximately $2,400, with 
$2,000 in monthly expenses, leaving $400 in discretionary income. (Tr. 17-18, 24-27; 
GX 1, e-QIP, dated May 3, 2012) 
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (GX 3, dated March 10, 2012; GX 4, dated 
October 23, 2014) verify the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a medical debt for 
$473 (SOR 1.a); a charged off loan for $328 (SOR 1.b); an insurance debt for $203 
(SOR 1.c); a medical debt for $36 (SOR 1.d); a satellite company debt for $658 (SOR 
1.e); another debt to the same satellite company for $819 (SOR 1.f); a debt for the 
purchase of a lawn mower for $2,156 (SOR 1.g); a department store account for $1,015 
(SOR 1.h); a debt on a repossessed truck for $8,145 (SOR 1.i); and a state tax debt for 
$4,000 (SOR 1.j). The total amount of the debt in the SOR is approximately $18,000.  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator from OPM on April 18, 2012. 
Applicant told the security investigator that his home state tax returns were not filed or 
taxes paid from 2008 to 2010 because the person who filed his taxes did not have all of 
the documents required to file the state taxes. The state tax returns were filed in 
January 2012, and he owed state taxes of approximately $4,000. He agreed to a 
payment arrangement with the state paying $200 per month until the debt is resolved. 
 
Applicant also told the investigator that he had a truck loan that was delinquent 
since 2005 because he did not have sufficient income to make the payments since 
2005. He returned the truck to the dealer because of a mechanical problem in 2011. He 
has not made any payments and owes approximately $8,000. He plans to make 
arrangements with the creditor to pay the debts. 
 
Applicant recalled a personal loan that he has been unable to pay as noted at 
SOR 1.b. He told the investigator that he had a department store credit card go to 
default in June 2005 when he did not have sufficient income to make payments. (SOR 
3 
 
1.h) He has not made any payments on this card. He did not recall the accounts at SOR 
1.e and 1.f. but he was going to check on them. He recalled the debt at SOR 1.g for a 
lawn mower. He stopped making payments on the loan when the lawn mower broke. He 
did not recall the other accounts or their status. (GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, 
dated April 18, 2012) 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant noted that he did not know about the 
medical debts (SOR 1.a, and 1.d). He stated that he is making payments on the loan at 
SOR 1.b, and that he paid an insurance debt at SOR 1.c. He did not know about the 
debts at SOR 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. He forgot about the department store account at SOR 
1.h. He admits the debt for the truck loan and noted that he returned the truck to the 
creditor. (SOR 1.i) He admits that he owes state taxes and is paying the taxes under a 
settlement plan. (SOR 1.j) Applicant did not present any documents to support his 
statements.  
 
Applicant testified at the hearing that he was not sure of the origin of the medical 
debts at SOR 1.a and 1.d but they could be for a family member. He was going to check 
on the debts and provide information on the status of the debts. Applicant stated he paid 
the loan debt at SOR 1.b and the insurance debt at SOR 1.c. He would provide 
verification of the payoffs after the hearing. (Tr. 17-20) The debts at SOR 1.e and 1.f are 
to the same television service provider. He called the company and they had no record 
of the debt at SOR 1.e. He did acknowledge the account for the television service 
provider at SOR 1.f and stated that the debt was paid off. He did not provide 
documentation about the status of any of the debts. (Tr. 20-21) 
 
Applicant initially stated that he did not know about the debt at SOR 1.g. When 
advised that he told the security investigator in the personal subject interview about a 
loan debt for a lawnmower, Applicant remembered the debt. He made some payments 
on the loan, but when the lawnmower stopped working, he returned the lawnmower to 
the dealer and stopped paying the loan. He was to provide documentation on the status 
of the debt after the hearing. (Tr. 21-23) Applicant never made any payments on the 
department store credit card debt at SOR 1.h because he just did not want to pay them. 
(Tr. 23-24) 
 
Applicant made some payments on the truck loan at SOR 1.i. When the truck 
broke down, he returned the truck to the dealer. He did not make any payments after he 
returned the truck. He has not been in contact with the creditor for the loan. Applicant 
was to contact the creditor and provide documentation concerning the status of the debt 
after the hearing. (Tr. 27-29) 
 
Applicant stated that he has made payments according to a payment plan for his 
state taxes as noted at SOR 1.j. He believes the amount of the debt is now 
approximately $1,000. Applicant was to provide documents on the status of the debt 
after the hearing. (Tr. 29-32) 
 
4 
 
Applicant was provided ample opportunity to submit documents to substantiate 
his claims concerning the status of his debts. Applicant did not provide any documents 
after the hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. However, the security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Security clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. An individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is at risk of acting inconsistently 
with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is 
required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial obligations. 
Applicant incurred debts that he could not satisfy. Even though he denied some of the 
debts because he had no knowledge of them, the credit reports validate the debts. The 
delinquent debts, as established by Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports, raise 
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The 
information indicates both an inability and an unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant has delinquent debts that are 
current and not resolved. Applicant has not established that he has paid any of his past-
due financial obligations, or that he has a reasonable plan to pay any of his debts. He 
claims that he has no knowledge of some debts, but he acknowledged them in the 
personal subject interview, and they are verified by credit reports. He was to research 
his debts and provide information concerning their status. He claims to have paid or is 
paying some of the debts. He did not provide any documents to verify any of his claims. 
He did not present any information that he sought or received financial counseling. He 
did not provide any documents of a good-faith effort to repay debts. He has not 
presented any plans for a systematic method of managing his finances, nor has he 
shown a reasonable, prudent, and honest adherence to his financial duties and 
obligations. He has not shown that he has a systematic method of handling debts. He 
has not established a meaningful track record of debt payment.  
 
Applicant has not shown that he manages his personal financial obligations 
reasonably and responsibly, and his lack of responsible financial conduct is likely to 
continue. There is ample evidence of irresponsible behavior, lack of good judgment, and 
financial unreliability. Based on all of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant 
has not mitigated security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s over eight 
years of service in the shipyard. However, this information does not offset the significant 
information concerning Applicant’s irresponsible management of his finances. Applicant 
did not present sufficient information to establish that he acted reasonably and 
responsibly towards his finances. His financial track record does not establish 
confidence that he has or will responsibly manage his financial obligations. This 
indicates that he will not be concerned or act responsibly in regard to classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
