 Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-09592
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his history of alcohol-
related arrests and convictions. He is still on probation for his most recent drunk driving
conviction. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On April 26, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of his background investigation, which
included Applicant’s responses to interrogatories  from adjudicators for the Department1
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 11 exhibits (Items 1 - 11) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
2
of Defense (DOD), it could not be determined that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to continue to hold a security clearance.2
On May 2, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested3
a decision without a hearing. On July 13, 2015, Department Counsel issued a File of
Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on July4
22, 2015, and was advised he had 30 days from the date of receipt to submit additional
information in response to the FORM. The record closed without any response to the
FORM from Applicant. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that between September 2003 and
July 2012, Applicant was charged five times with alcohol-related offenses, including one
charge (later dismissed) of liquor prohibitions (underage possession or consumption of
alcohol) in 2003 (SOR 1.a), and four charges and convictions for operating a vehicle
while intoxicated (OVI) (SOR 1.b - 1.e). Applicant’s most recent OVI conviction occurred
in 2012, and Applicant is still on probation for that offense. Under Guideline J, the
Government cross-alleged as criminal conduct Applicant’s alcohol-related misconduct
alleged in SOR 1.a - 1.e (SOR 2.a). Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations.
(FORM, Items 1 and 4) In addition to the facts established by his admissions, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 31 years old and works as a customer service representative for a
defense contractor, who hired him in February 2012. Applicant has never been married.
He attended college from 2002 to 2004, and attended technical school from 2005 to
2007. He did not earn a degree or certification at either school. (FORM, Item 5)
In 2003, before Applicant turned 21, he was charged with underage possession
of alcohol. The charge was later dismissed. Other than the court record of the charge
and its dismissal (FORM, Item 7), there is no other information before me about this
event. Likewise, this charge was not discussed with Applicant when he was interviewed
by a Government investigator in June 2012. SOR 1.a and its cross-reference as criminal
conduct in SOR 2.a are resolved for Applicant.
Starting in January 2005, Applicant was arrested, charged and convicted of OVI
four times. For his offense in 2005, he served three days in jail and was on probation
until 2007. For his offense in 2009, he served six days in jail and was placed on
probation for two years. When he was arrested for OVI in November 2009, his probation
 Directive. 6.3.5
3
was extended for 15 months and he spent 10 days in jail. One of the terms of his
probation was that he abstain from alcohol and illegal drugs. His driving privileges were
also suspended with each conviction. (FORM, Items 4 - 10)
During an appointment with his probation officer in June 2011, Applicant tested
positive for alcohol and cocaine. His probation was revoked and he was ordered to
serve the balance of a previously suspended jail sentence, as well as additional jail time
for his probation violations. In all, he served 170 days in jail. (FORM, Items 5 and 6)
Between April and June of 2010, Applicant received in-patient treatment for
alcohol dependence. He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent and advised to abstain
from alcohol. His aftercare plan included attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
meetings. However, Applicant consumed alcohol after his discharge from treatment to
at least June 2011. In his EQIP, and when he was interviewed by a Government
investigator in June 2012, he claimed to be a “proud member of AA” and that he had
been sober for a year as of the interview. (FORM, Items 5 and 6)
In July 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with OVI “High Levels.” In
December 2012, he was convicted and sentenced to 150 days in jail, of which 120 days
were suspended. He served 30 days in house arrest and is on probation until December
2017. His driving privileges are suspended until July 2017. In his response to the SOR,
Applicant averred that he is “now a grateful recovering alcoholic and an active member
of Alcoholics Anonymous and [his] community.” (FORM, Items 4 and 11)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
4
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls7
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such9
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption
Notwithstanding the resolution of SOR 1.a in Applicant’s favor, available
information, including Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, establishes that
Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times to the point of excess and intoxication, for his
entire adult life. He has been charged and convicted four times for alcohol-related
offenses in the past ten years. This information raises a security concern expressed at
AG ¶ 21, as follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
22 disqualifying conditions:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
5
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education,
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.
I have also considered the potential application of the mitigating conditions at AG
¶ 23(a):
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
None of these mitigating conditions apply. Despite repeated incarceration and
completion of an inpatient alcohol treatment program, Applicant continued to drink until
at least July 2012. His current claims of sobriety and commitment to AA ring hollow in
light of his long history of probation violations resulting from an inability or unwillingness
to abstain from alcohol consumption. Applicant is under court-ordered abstention from
alcohol until December 2017, he cannot drive until July 2017, and he risks an additional
120 days in jail if it is found he has consumed alcohol. All of the foregoing precludes a
finding that Applicant will abstain from alcohol of his own volition. His use of alcohol is
still a security concern.
6
Criminal Conduct
Notwithstanding the resolution of SOR 1.a in Applicant’s favor, available
information shows that Applicant’s alcohol-related conduct since 2005, as alleged in
SOR 1.b - 1.e, also constitutes criminal conduct. This information is sufficient to raise a
security concern that is addressed at AG ¶ 30, as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
More specifically, this record requires application of the following AG ¶ 31
disqualifying conditions:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated
rehabilitation program.
I have also considered the potential applicability of the following AG ¶ 32
mitigating conditions:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
For the same reasons the AG ¶ 23 mitigating conditions do not apply, I do not
find any support for mitigation under this guideline. The underlying cause of Applicant’s
criminal conduct is his addiction to alcohol. Unless and until he can demonstrate, which
he failed to do here, that his use of alcohol is no longer a concern, his inability or
unwillingness to obey the law will disqualify him from eligibility for access to classified
information.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines G and J, I have reviewed the record before me in
7
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant claims to be sober
and that he is committed to AA. His prior history and his current probation status
undermine the credibility of his claims and make it more likely than not that his alcohol-
related criminal conduct will recur. This record sustains serious doubts about Applicant’s
suitability to hold a security clearance. Because protection of the national interest is the
principal goal of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
