1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-10324
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on April 26, 2012. The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 5,
2015, detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
Applicant received the SOR on June 18, 2015, and he answered it on July 11,
2015. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on September 30, 2015, and I received the case assignment on October 1, 2015.
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 6, 2015, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on October 22, 2015. The Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1
through GE 4, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified. He submitted exhibits (AE) marked as AE A through AE C, which
were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on November 3, 2015. I held the record open until November 12, 2015,
for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant requested additional time and was
given until November 23, 2015 to submit the requested information by order dated
November 18, 2015. He timely submitted AE D - AE Q, which were received and
admitted without objection. The record closed on November 23, 2015.
Procedural Ruling
Notice
Applicant received the notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing less than
15 days before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8. of the
Directive to receive the notice at least 15 days before the hearing. Applicant
affirmatively waived this right under the Directive. (Tr. 9.)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a -
1.f of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He was
unable to locate any information about the debts listed in the factual allegations in ¶¶
1.g - 1.i of the SOR. His answers are deemed a denial of the factual allegations.  He1
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 50 years old, works as a material specialist for DOD contractor.
He has worked for his employer since October 2000. As a member of a work team, he
received an award in 2014 and in 2015 for outstanding performance. His director wrote
GE 1; AE Q; Tr. 17.2
GE 1; Tr. 17-18, 33.3
Tr. 24, 32, 34.4
GE 2, p. 4; Tr. 35-36.5
3
a thank you letter to him for his support of his team. He has not been disciplined or
suspended at work.2
Applicant graduated from high school. He has taken classes at a community
college, but he has not received a degree or program certificate. He and his wife
married in February 2011. They have a 15-year-old son. He has a step-daughter and
two stepsons, all of whom live independently. His wife does not work. She is a diabetic.3
In 2007, Applicant and his coworkers engaged in a labor strike, which lasted
three months. During the strike, his 1998 car was repossessed when he could not make
the monthly payment. Three or four years ago, physicians diagnosed Applicant with
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. He underwent radiation treatments and other medical care for his
disease. He incurred nearly $5,000 of medical bills that his health insurance did not
pay.4
Applicant’s wife managed the household finances. She did not pay all their bills.
She also obtained two credit cards in 2005 without his knowledge and used them. She
fell behind in the payments. Around 2008, the creditor garnished his wages to pay the
debts, which totaled approximately $2,000. After he paid the debts, he closed the
accounts. Applicant does not have any credit cards.5
Applicant currently earns $3,416 a month in gross income, and he receives
$2,484 a month in net pay. His earnings statements for September 2015 and October
2015 reflect that he occasionally works overtime or double time. In August 2015, he
worked six hours of overtime and six hours of double time for additional net income of
$420. In September 2015, and for the pay period ending October 9, 2015, he worked
five hours of double time for an additional income $122 in October 2015. His wife earns
about $35 a month from some work she does. His total net monthly income is $2,519.
His monthly expenses include $565 for his mortgage, $109 for the second mortgage,
$33 for home repairs, $171 for electric and gas, $100 for water, $49 for phones, $155
for cable and internet, $66 for car insurance, $100 for gasoline, $58 for car
maintenance, $500 for food and lunches, $55 barber shop, $200 for son’s school band,
and $40 for pet care. His monthly expenses total approximately $2,100. His budget
listed nearly $300 for dry cleaning and laundry, which  appears to be erroneous and
such an expense does not show up on his monthly bank account. Home repairs and car
repairs are not always incurred every month. His earnings statement indicate that $192
AE D; AE O; AE P.6
AE B; AE L; Tr. 23-24.7
GE 2; GE E; AE A; AE E; AE F; AE P; Tr. 24-25.  8
GE 4; AE I; AE P; Tr. 25, 27-28.9
GE 4; AE C; AE G; AE J; AE P; Tr. 25-27, 42.10
4
a month is deducted from his income for two loan payments. Applicant has
approximately $400 a month remaining income to pay other expenses.6
The SOR identified nine purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by
credit reports from 2012, 2014, and 2015 totaling approximately $38,609. SOR
allegation 1.a for $17,498 is the largest debt, and it relates to the second mortgage on
his home. Applicant advised that he fell behind in this mortgage payment. He negotiated
a monthly payment of $109, which began in July 2015. He has timely made his payment
each month.7
SOR allegation 1.b ($4,953) concerns medical bills not paid by Applicant’s
insurance carrier for his cancer treatment. Applicant contacted the creditor and
negotiated a payment plan. He agreed to pay $103 a month on this debt, and he began
making his payments on July 15, 2015. The documentation shows a second creditor
seeking payment for the same medical office as of November 2015. There is no
evidence that this debt was sold and Applicant does not indicate an awareness that the
debt has been sold. Applicant complies with the terms of his payment plan.  8
SOR allegation 1.c concerns a $674 cell phone account now held by a collection
company. Applicant negotiated a payment of $64 a month. The September 2015 credit
report shows a balance of $488, which indicates payments have been made on the
account. Applicant provided a statement from the collection company showing a
balance of $400 and a payment of $95 on October 29, 2015. With this last payment, the
collection company advised that the debt had been settled or closed and no further
payments would be taken. Applicant noted that the collection company settled the debt.9
SOR allegations 1.d ($368), 1.e ($90), and 1.f ($33) relate to medical bills.
Applicant settled and paid the $90 medical bill on July 10, 2015. The September 2015
credit report indicates that he paid the $33 medical bill and that as of that date, the
balance on the $368 debt was $148. Applicant is paying $50 a month on this bill with a
payment made on October 20, 2015, leaving a balance of $98. Applicant provided
documentation showing that he paid a $122 medical bill in full as of October 29, 2015.
This bill is not listed on the SOR. The September 2015 credit report identifies another
unpaid medical bill for $385. Applicant was unaware of this debt until the hearing.10
Applicant’s wife attended college for training in the medical profession. She
obtained student loans to pay for her education. These loans are the source of the
GE 2, p. 3; GE 3, p.2; AE H; Tr. 27-28, 37.11
Response to SOR; GE 2 - GE 4; Tr. 29-30,12
Tr. 46-49.13
AE K; AE M ; AE N; Tr. 42.14
5
$11,173 education debt in SOR allegation 1.g. According to the May 2012 credit report,
the original creditor for this debt filed a claim with the Government for payment and
closed its account. The Department of Education now holds this debt. The account has
been placed in forbearance until May 24, 2016. His wife stated that she plans to start
working before May 2016 to pay the debt. At this time, the debt is in good standing.11
In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he contacted the creditor
identified in SOR allegation 1.h ($356). The creditor advised that it did not have an
account in his name. This debt is not listed on the October 2014 and the September
2015 credit reports. The last SOR debt (1.I - $3,464) concerns a car repossession.
Applicant acknowledged that his car was repossessed because he was unable to make
the monthly payment while he was on strike in late 2006 and early 2007. The May 2012
credit report indicates that the debt is a repossession and that there may be a balance
due. Given the age of the debt, it is no longer listed on the October 2014 and the
September 2015 credit reports.12
Appellant files his federal and state tax returns each year. Any refund he receives
from the state is applied to a state debt incurred by his stepson as a juvenile. He
advised at the hearing that he owes $1,000 in taxes. It is unclear if he owes this amount
to the federal government or the state government.13
Applicant provided copies of his electric and water bills. He has a balance on
both bills, but he makes a reasonable payment each month on these bills. His mortgage
account statement indicates that he has an additional outstanding balance of almost
$400. Applicant called this amount a bid fee. He pays his mortgage each month, but he
has not paid the fee. The record lacks evidence that he has had financial counseling.14
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
6
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
7
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems following a strike at work and
because his insurance carrier did not pay all the medical bills for his cancer treatment.
Most of the debts had not been resolved when the SOR was issued. These two
disqualifying conditions apply.
The financial considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant lost three to four months of work and income from late 2006 into early
2007 because of a strike at his place of employment. The strike reduced his monthly
income, making it difficult for him to pay all his monthly expenses. He stopped paying
for his car, and it was repossessed. Several years later, he underwent radiation
treatments for Hodgkin’s lymphoma. His medical insurance company did not pay all the
costs related to his treatments. These events are circumstances beyond his control.
Because he did not act sooner to resolve these debts, AG ¶ 20(b) is only partially
applicable.
Applicant did not present evidence of financial counseling; however, he has taken
steps to resolve his past-due debts and to manage his finances. He has paid or is
paying several of the SOR debts, particularly the larger debts. He has taken control of
his finances and is working towards the resolution of his debts. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.
Applicant began contacting his creditors in the early summer of 2015. He
negotiated payment plans with six creditors and paid his smallest bill. As a result of his
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue creditors15
or otherwise resolve debts:
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other
good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the
term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires
a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and
adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show
that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of
limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigation condition].
(Internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No.02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2004) (quoting ISCR
Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).
8
actions, three smaller debts are paid, and monthly payments on three other debts are
ongoing. His actions reflect a good-faith effort  to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies.15
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility for
a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on
a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus
exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
9
In assessing whether an applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App.
Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual
debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-
01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not required,
as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt
listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5,
2006). All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has “. . .
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2
(App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of
an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to
which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness
is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable,
should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at
4 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones
listed in the SOR.
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions
in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to quickly
resolve his debts when they began to develop in 2007 or after his later cancer treatments,
which created a concern for the Government. Sometime before the SOR was issued, two
non-SOR debts were resolved through garnishment, which reduced his available income
to pay his remaining debts. Since receiving the SOR, he has worked to resolve his
overdue debts. He paid three small debts and is paying on the remaining three debts, one
of which should be resolved shortly. His largest debt relates to a second mortgage. He is
paying this debt and will be doing so over a long period of time. 
Applicant is not required to be debt free to hold a security clearance. However, he
must manage his income and expenses. While he has not fully paid his utility bills, he is
paying monthly on the bills, which makes the bills current. Again, he is not required to pay
the bill in full each month to hold a security clearance. His wife is planning on returning to
work, and if she does, her income can help with resolving their debts more quickly. In
reviewing and weighing all the evidence of record, I find that Applicant has taken control
of his finances; he has shown a track record for debt resolution; and he is working to
resolve his unpaid debts, which cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress. Of
course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid: it is whether his financial
10
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a position of trust. While some
debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
