 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11679 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
29, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 17, 2015. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In addition, the Government submitted an exhibit list that was marked 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which 
was admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until December 
1, 2015, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. The 
documents were marked as AE B through D. The Government did not object to the 
documents and they are admitted into evidence.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 25, 2015.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government moved to amend the SOR and added ¶ 1.i to read: “You failed 
to file your Federal income tax return for 2014, as required. As of the date of the 
Statement of Reasons, the tax return remains unfiled.” There was no objection, and the 
motion was granted.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He is a high school graduate. He served in the military 
from 1986 to 1992 and was honorably discharged. He married in 1990 and has a 23-
year-old son, and two stepdaughters ages 26 and 29. Applicant provides financial 
support to his son who lives at home and is unemployed. Applicant’s 11-year-old 
Godson lives with him. The boy was previously in an unstable and disruptive living 
situation. Applicant does not receive financial support from either of the child’s parents 
and has assumed financial responsibility for him. Applicant has worked for the same 
company since 1996.3  
 
Credit reports from October 2010, July 2012, November 2014, and July 2015, 
substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR.4  
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a house in 2000. They later missed several 
mortgage payments due to financial difficulties in approximately 2003. They filed 
bankruptcy under Chapter 13 in April 2003 because Applicant wanted to keep the 
house. They missed a payment under their bankruptcy plan and were advised by their 
attorney that they could restructure the plan to make the payments more affordable. The 
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2004. Applicant testified that in 2004, they got behind 
                                                          
1 HE II and III are the Government’s email memoranda. 
 
2 Tr. 72-73. 
 
3 Tr. 18, 64-70. 
 
4 GE 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
again on their mortgage payments, so they filed bankruptcy in March 2005. Applicant 
stated they complied with the terms of the Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and in July 2009 their 
debts were discharged.5  
 
After the bankruptcy discharge, later in 2009, Applicant again got behind on his 
mortgage payments. He attempted to work with the mortgage company to resolve the 
delinquency on their mortgage loan. Applicant testified he participated in mediation with 
the mortgage lender two to three times, but could not reach an agreement. He 
attempted to negotiate a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure to keep the house. In 2010, 
Applicant believed they had reached an agreement, but the mortgage lender decided to 
continue with foreclosure proceedings. Applicant stated that the house was in need of 
repairs. He tried to pay for the repairs, but then could not pay other bills. He testified the 
house had mold and his son has asthma, so they had to move out of it sometime in 
2011. In his interview with a government investigator on August 21, 2012, he indicated 
that after he completed his Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2009, he attempted to resolve the 
mortgage debt from 2009 to 2011, with negative results. He continued to receive notices 
from the mortgage lender. Applicant’s credit reports reflect he made his last mortgage 
payment on September 2009. There is no explanation for why after his debts were 
discharged in bankruptcy, he was again delinquent on his mortgage payments.6  
 
Post-hearing, Applicant provided documents that reflect a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure was requested on November 13, 2012, and it was completed on December 
7, 2012. Applicant provided a document dated September 22, 2014, that indicates the 
plaintiff mortgage company had filed a lawsuit against Applicant and it “voluntarily 
dismissed its complaint for Foreclosure and Other Relief, without Prejudice, and release 
the Notice of Lis Pendens  . . .”7 Applicant testified that he went to court regarding the 
lawsuit, and the judge told him the case was dismissed. The mortgage debt in SOR ¶ 
1.a ($41,362) is listed as charged off on his credit reports. It does not appear the 
creditor is seeking reimbursement for this debt.8 
 
Applicant cosigned a lease for his stepdaughter for an apartment in 
approximately 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,998)). He agreed to pay the lease. During his 2012 
interview with a government investigator, he indicated his stepdaughter had moved out 
of the apartment, and the management company renewed the lease. He was going to 
have his wife contact the company and see what could be worked out. At his hearing, 
he stated that after the lease expired, his stepdaughter renewed it without his signature. 
He stated that his stepdaughter disputed the account, and she is attempting to make 
arrangements for a payment plan with the creditor. In his post-hearing submission, he 
                                                          
5 Tr. 20-24, 51-54; GE 2. 
 
6 GE 3, 4, 6. 
 
7 AE A, C, D. 
 
8 Tr. 25-40; GE 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
4 
 
 
indicated he is disputing the debt and had contacted the creditor. He did not provide any 
documentation to substantiate his or his stepdaughter’s actions to resolve the debt.9 
 
During his 2012 interview, Applicant was confronted with the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($278). He indicated he was unfamiliar with this collection account for medical services. 
At his hearing, he did not provide evidence of actions he has taken to research or 
resolve the debt.10 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($792) and 1.e ($690) are reflected as paid on his credit 
report.11 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($207) is a telephone account. Applicant was made 
aware of the debt during his 2012 interview. He indicated he was not aware it was in 
collection. At this hearing, he indicated he did not pay it.12 
 
Applicant testified he failed to file his 2014 federal income tax returns. He stated 
he ran out of time, and it never got filed. He does not know if he owes taxes or is due a 
refund. He did not file for an extension. He stated that he does not have any other 
delinquent debts. He estimated he has about $400 remaining at the end of the month 
after paying his bills. His wife also works. He stated he intends to take care of his 
financial issues. He does not have a budget. He has not had financial counseling. In his 
post-hearing submission he stated he intended to seek credit counseling and budgeting 
classes.13  
 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission stated his financial problems were caused 
by “family situations, illnesses, and the economy.” He did not elaborate and provide 
specific information. He indicated his wife has suffered from an illness that put a strain 
on them financially; the latest was a medical procedure she had a couple of years ago. 
Health insurance and medical expenses have had a major impact on their finances.14  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 40-45; GE 2, 6; AE B. 
 
10 Tr. 46; GE 2. 
 
11 Tr. 47-48; GE 5, 6. 
 
12 Tr. 49-51; GE 4. 
 
13 Tr. 54-64. 
 
14 AE B. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
  
Applicant has delinquent debts that are unpaid or unresolved. He failed to file his 
2014 federal income tax return. He filed bankruptcy twice. The first was dismissed 
because he missed a payment. The second, a Chapter 13 payment plan, he completed, 
and his debts were discharged in 2009. Shortly after those debts were discharged, he 
again failed to pay his mortgage payments. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to conclude he has taken 
appropriate action to contact creditors to resolve or pay the debts alleged in the SOR. 
He was made aware, in his 2012 interview, that his delinquent debts were a security 
concern. He did not contact these creditors prior to this hearing. After his hearing, he 
indicated he contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b, to dispute the debt, but did not provide 
documentation or the basis of the dispute. Applicant failed to file his 2014 federal 
income tax returns. His tax obligations did not occur under unique circumstances that 
are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s inaction in addressing his failure to file his 2014 tax 
returns and resolve other debts is ongoing, recent, and casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant repeatedly had difficulty paying his mortgage. After completing a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan and having his debts discharged in 2009, during 
the same year he again failed to make his mortgage payments. His last mortgage 
payment was in September 2009, yet he continued to live in the house until 2011. 
Although he transferred the property as part of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, he was in 
arrears on his payments, and the debt was eventually charged off. He attributed his 
financial problems to family situations, illness, and the economy. These were conditions 
beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to explain why he was delinquent on his 
mortgage payments shortly after he had his debts discharged in bankruptcy. Applicant 
has been steadily employed by the same employer for 19 years. He did not provide 
specifics regarding his family situations or illnesses, but did indicate he had significant 
medical expenses. Applicant has been on notice about his delinquent debts since 2012 
and failed to provide proof he has paid or resolved them. I find he did not act 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence that his financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. There is insufficient evidence that he initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay the creditors or otherwise resolve the debts. Applicant did not 
provide evidence that he filed his 2014 federal income tax returns. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply. Applicant failed to provide documented proof for the basis of his 
disputes with creditors or documented evidence regarding the actions he has taken to 
resolve them. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He began having financial difficulty in 2003 when he 
failed to pay his mortgage. He has a history of trying to save his house from foreclosure. 
After completing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan in 2009, he was again 
delinquent on his mortgage payments. His last payment was September 2009. He 
moved out of the house in 2011. The mortgage was eventually resolved through a deed 
in lieu of foreclosure, and the debt is reflected as charged off on his credit report. 
Applicant failed to show he has resolved the smaller debts that were alleged, even 
though he has been aware of them since his background interview in 2012. Applicant 
failed to file his 2014 federal income tax return. Applicant’s conduct raises questions 
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f-1.i:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
