  Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-11346
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent student loans
and other financial problems. His request for continued access to classified information
is granted.
Statement of the Case
On May 18, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed
background investigation, which include Applicant’s responses to interrogatories issued
by Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators,  it could not be determined that it is1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six exhibits (Items 1 - 6) proffered in support4
of the Government’s case.
2
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information.2
On November 12, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision3
without a hearing. On May 28, 2015, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on July 20,4
2015, and was advised he had 30 days from the date of receipt to submit additional
information in response to the FORM. The record closed on August 19, 2015, without
any response to the FORM from Applicant. The case was assigned to me on
September 18, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $34,438 for
seven delinquent debts (SOR 1.a - 1.g). The debts alleged at SOR 1.a - 1.c are for past-
due student loans totaling $13,483, about 40 percent of the total debt at issue. Applicant
admitted all but two (SOR 1.d and 1.f) of the SOR allegations. In denying those debts,
he asserted they were fraudulently attributed to him and that they no longer appear in
his credit history. (FORM, Item 1) In addition to his admissions, I make the following
findings of fact.
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked as an electronics technician since May 2012. He requires a security clearance
for his job. From July 1998 until July 2002, Applicant served on active duty in the U.S.
Army. After he was honorably discharged, he began working while attending school for
an associate’s degree in electronics, which he received in August 2005. Applicant
financed his tuition through student loans. Thereafter, for personal reasons, he had to
move to the state where he now lives and works. From 2006 until he was hired by his
current employer, Applicant was underemployed and struggled to meet all of his
financial obligations. (FORM, Items 1 - 3)
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed his delinquent student loans
and the credit card debt alleged at SOR 1.g. After being interviewed by a Government
investigator in August 2012, Applicant realized the full extent of his debts. He also was
made aware of the debts at SOR 1.d and 1.f, which he has disputed successfully.
Those accounts were opened by a family member without his knowledge or consent.
They are no longer attributable to him in recent credit reports. SOR 1.d and 1.f are
resolved for the Applicant. (FORM, Items 2 - 5)
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
3
One of the debts he disclosed in his EQIP, that is not alleged in the SOR, was a
$12,732 student loan debt. This debt represents the consolidation of the student loans
alleged at SOR 1.a - 1.c. After his interview, Applicant enrolled in a student loan
rehabilitation program. In response to DOD interrogatories, he showed that from
February 2013 until December 2013, he made regular monthly payments on his loans
and was able to bring his student loans current. Applicant now pays $125 monthly to the
new creditor for his consolidated student loan accounts. SOR 1.a - 1.c are resolved for
the Applicant. (FORM, Items 2 and 3)
Applicant has a modest but positive cash flow each month after he pays his
expenses, including his student loans. He does not appear to be spending irresponsibly
or living beyond his means, and there is no indication that he has incurred any new
unpaid debt since he was hired in 2012. (FORM, Items 3 - 5)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
4
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls7
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such9
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information supports the allegations in the SOR. The facts established
herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations).
By contrast, the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions apply:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
5
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant incurred financial problems when he relocated in 2006 and was unable
to find work that paid him enough to meet his then-existing obligations. After being hired
for his current job in 2012 and being interviewed about his debts, Applicant took action
to resolve his student loans and successfully dispute two other debts well before DOD
issued the SOR. Of the seven debts alleged, he has resolved five of them. Although two
of the past-due accounts remain outstanding, he is not required to be debt free as long
as his financial problems do not reflect adversely on his judgment and reliability. There
has been no financial misconduct or irresponsibility here. Applicant has a positive
monthly cash flow and is making regular payments to his student loans, which comprise
most of his remaining debt. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under this
guideline.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is an honorably
discharged veteran, and he has been gainfully employed in his current position for three
years. He was candid and forthright about his financial problems when he applied for a
clearance, and he timely acted to resolve his financial problems as his resources
allowed. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record evidence as a whole shows
the doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information have been
satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
