1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-12070 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 27, 2012. 
On May 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 30, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 3, 
2015, and the case was assigned to me on October 2, 2015. On October 8, 2015, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for October 28, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
2 
 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open until November 16, 2015, to enable her to 
submit additional evidence. She timely submitted AX E through J, which were received 
without objection.1 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 5, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the sole allegation of a delinquent 
mortgage loan, past due for $136,407, with a total balance of $438,599. However, she 
denied that the delinquent debt raised questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. Her admissions in her answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old library technician. She was hired by a federal 
contractor in March 2012, contingent on obtaining a security clearance, but she has 
been unable to start working for the federal contractor until her SCA is adjudicated. In 
April 2013, she began working as a qualified developmental disabilities professional 
(QDDP)2 to support herself while the decision on her SCA is pending. (AX C; Tr. 31, 
49.)  
 
 Applicant has never held a DOD security clearance. However, she received 
favorable trustworthiness determinations from other federal agencies while working as a 
contractor employee in 2003 and 2010. (GX 1 at 37-38.)  
 
Applicant has encountered several periods of unemployment. She was 
unemployed from May 2007 to December 2009. She worked as a library technician and 
assistant project manager from December 2009 to February 2011, when she was 
terminated for unsatisfactory performance. She was unemployed from February to 
August 2011 but held two one-month temporary jobs during that period. She was 
unemployed from September 2011 until April 2013, when she began working as a 
QDDP.  
 
 Applicant attended a university from January 2007 to June 2010 and received a 
bachelor’s degree. She immediately began work on her master’s degree in business 
administration with a concentration in acquisition, which she received in June 2012. She 
incurred 22 student loans totaling about $190,300, which were all deferred when she 
submitted her SCA in March 2012. (GX 3; Tr. 36.) They were in forbearance until 
December 5, 2015 (AX E.) Starting in January 2016, she will be making monthly 
payments of $200-$300 on her student loans. (Tr. 38-39.)  
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s “discovery” letter, transmitting GX 1 through 5 to Applicant, is attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits is attached as HX II. His response 
to AX E through J is attached as HX III. 
 
2 A QDDP develops, coordinates, and monitors treatment for persons with developmental disabilities. (AX 
C at 4.) In her testimony, Applicant referred to the position as a qualified intellectual developmental 
professional (QIDP). (Tr. 31.) 
3 
 
Applicant is currently working toward another master’s degree in health care 
services. She was unable to continue the deferment of her student loans when she 
began her most recent graduate program, because she was taking only one or two 
classes and was not a full-time student. She borrowed the tuition directly from the 
university and still owes about $1,500 on the loan. (Tr. 33-37.)  
 
Applicant married in December 1991 and divorced in June 1999. Her first 
husband died in July 2007 due to atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and chronic 
alcoholism. (AX D.) She remarried in December 1999 and divorced in July 2010. She 
has a 25-year-old daughter from her first marriage and a 14-year-old son from her 
second marriage. The divorce decree obligated her second husband to pay child 
support of $538 per month. (AX B.) Her daughter is a college graduate, lives with 
Applicant, and is looking for a job (Tr. 33.).  
 
Applicant and first her husband purchased a home in 2003 for about $175,000. 
(Tr. 42.) They refinanced their home several times, each time withdrawing their equity 
and increasing the amount borrowed. (AX G; AX I; AX J.) During a personal subject 
interview (PSI) in May 2012, Applicant told a security investigator that her home loan 
payments were 14 months past due, that she had submitted a request for a loan 
modification in May or June of 2011, and that the request was being processed. (GX 2 
at 4.) The record contains no documentation of an application for loan modification in 
2011. Applicant’s April 2012 credit bureau report (CBR) reflected that her payment was 
30 days past due on a variable-rate loan for $333,000, opened in April 2006 and closed 
in February 2007. Her December 2014 CBR and September 2015 CBR reflect that her 
current loan was opened in February 2007. (GX 3 at 10; GX 5 at 3; AX I.) Her 
September 2015 CBR reflects that the balance on the loan is $438,599, and the 
payments are past due in the amount of $159,614.  
 
Applicant still lives in the home, but she has not made any payments since she 
became unemployed in 2011. She testified that she told the lender that she wanted to 
resume making payments after she began working in 2013. (Tr. 49.) There is no 
evidence that she actually tendered any payments. 
 
Applicant’s only documented loan-modification request reflects that her request 
was denied in September 2015. The letter denying the request recommended that 
Applicant consider a deed in lieu of foreclosure, a short sale, or a short payoff, in which 
the borrower offers to pay less than the total balance of the loan. (AX A.) The denial 
letter informed Applicant that she could appeal the denial in writing within 15 days. She 
testified that she appealed the denial in writing and promised that she would provide a 
copy of her written appeal, but she did not include it in her post-hearing submission. (Tr. 
55.)  
 
In October 2015, Applicant submitted an application to the Neighborhood 
Assistance Corporation of America (NACA) for assistance. Although NACA offers 
counseling services as well as advocacy services, there is no evidence that Applicant 
received any financial counseling from NACA or any other agency. (AX F; AX H.)  
4 
 
Applicant’s current take-home pay is about $3,000 per month, and she receives 
$538 in child support from her ex-husband. (AX C; Tr. 58.) Her household and living 
expenses are about $1,200, leaving a net monthly remainder of more than $2,000. She 
testified that has spent the net remainder on electrical repairs, plumbing bills, and new 
appliances. (Tr. 65.) She does not have a savings account, but she testified that a friend 
holds her savings, which now total about $4,000 or $5,000. She does not use a bank 
savings account because it is too easy to withdraw the money and spend it. (Tr. 51.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
5 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Although only one 
delinquent debt is alleged, Applicant’s failure to make any payments for more than four 
years constitutes a “history” within the meaning of AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
6 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant currently has only one delinquent debt, 
but it is recent and was not incurred under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s unemployment from September 
2011 until April 2013 was a condition largely beyond her control. Her unemployment 
from February through August 2011 was not a condition beyond her control, because 
she was terminated for unsatisfactory performance. Furthermore, she has not acted 
responsibly. She provided no documentation for her statement during the May 2012 PSI 
that she applied for a loan modification in May or June 2011. Furthermore, she has not 
positioned herself to qualify for a loan modification. In spite of making no loan payments 
for four years and having a substantial monthly remainder, she has accumulated 
virtually no savings. She has not explored any of the alternatives that were offered by 
her lender (a deed in lieu of foreclosure, short sale, or short payoff) when her most 
recent application for a loan modification was denied. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are not established. Applicant has not sought or 
received financial counseling, she has made no payments on the debt for more than 
four years, and she has not disputed the debt.  
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security raised 
by her delinquent mortgage loan. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
