1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 12-12212
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has satisfied all of the delinquent debts alleged in the Statement of
Reasons (SOR) except three. Of these remaining debts, two accounts have been
closed, and Applicant is negotiating a payment plan in good faith with the creditor of the
third debt. Applicant mitigated the security concern. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On May 16, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F,
financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
 On June 10, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting subparagraphs 1.a,
1.c, 1.k, and 1.l, and denying the remainder. He requested a hearing and the case was
The debt listed in subparagraph 1.j stems from an overdraft of a checking account Applicant had in 2006.1
2
 
assigned to me on September 17, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
September 23, 2015, scheduling the hearing for October 14, 2015. The hearing was
held as scheduled. At the hearing, I received four Government exhibits (GE 1 - 4) and
admitted ten exhibits that Applicant submitted (AE A - J). DOHA received the transcript
(Tr.) on October 22, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old married man with two children, ages seven and three.
Applicant graduated from high school in 2003. In 2008, he enrolled in a vocational
school to pursue an associate’s degree in aeronautical engineering. (GE 1 at 13) He
graduated in 2010. Shortly after graduating, Applicant obtained a job with his current
employer, a defense contractor. (Tr. 13) He is an aeronautics technician whose duties
include repairing and overhauling aircraft. According to a coworker, he is a man of
“reliable and unquestioned character.” (AE A) Applicant has been married since 2011.
(GE 1 at 23)
Between 2002 and 2010, Applicant incurred approximately $15,000 of delinquent
debt, as listed in the SOR. He incurred the majority of this debt between the period after
finishing high school and before beginning vocational school, when he was “young [and]
naive.” (Tr. 14)
In 2012, Applicant began satisfying his delinquent debts. Currently, he has
satisfied all of the debts listed in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c through 1.i, 1.l, and 1.m, as
follows:
Debt Amount Description Evidence
1.a $515 medical bill AE C
1.c-1.i $803 (total) parking tickets Answer at 4-5
1.l $396 medical bill AE B
1.m $406 phone bill Answer at 6
The debts listed in subparagraphs 1.b, 1.j, and 1.k remain outstanding. The debt listed
in subparagraph 1.b, totalling $994, is a medical bill Applicant incurred after he broke
his leg while skateboarding in 2005, when he was 20 years old and had no health
insurance. (GE 4 at 7) Recently, Applicant contacted the creditor to make payment
arrangements, and was informed that they had written the account off, and it had been
deleted from his credit report. (Tr. 20) Similarly, when Applicant contacted the creditor of
the $666 debt listed in subparagraph 1.j,  and when he was informed that his account1
The parking tickets listed in subparagraphs 1.c to 1.I relate to this vehicle.2
3
 
had been deleted. (Tr. 21) Applicant requested a confirmation letter, but has yet to
receive it. (Tr. 21)
The debt listed in subparagraph 1.k, totalling $11,878, stems from a car that
Applicant, then a teenager, purchased in 2002 from his brother. (Tr. 22) When he
purchased the car (by assuming his brother’s loan), he had a stable job. (Tr. 22) Shortly
after purchasing it, he quit the job and relocated to another area to work with a relative
who had started a construction business. Applicant’s pay became less reliable. (Tr. 22)
At or about this time, the car began breaking down, requiring major repairs that
Applicant could not afford. Unable to either drive it or fix it, the car remain parked in the
relative’s yard for an extended period of time.  (Tr. 27) It is unclear from the record2
whether the creditor ever repossessed the car.
In October 2015, Applicant contacted the creditor of the automobile (SOR
subparagraph 1.k). He paid $200 towards the balance, and is in the process of
negotiating a repayment plan. (AE E; Tr. 24) Applicant anticipates that monthly
payments will range between $200 and $250. (Tr. 24-25)
Since Applicant began working with his current employer in 2010, he has accrued
$12,000 in a 401(k) account. Each year, he deposits his income tax refunds into a
savings account. Currently, his savings account has a $4,000 balance. (Tr. 34) He does
not have significant monthly after-expense income, but uses his savings account to help
him “out of tight spots.” (Tr. 34)  
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
4
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Between 2002 and 2010, Applicant incurred approximately $15,000 of
delinquent debt. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c),
“a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant has satisfied ten of the SOR debts in their entirety. As for the most
significant outstanding debt, the delinquent car loan, he has been making good-faith
efforts to resolve it, having made a $200 payment to the creditor and initiated
negotiations to repay the remainder. Any negative inference from the two debts that
were written off is outweighed by the positive security inferences generated by
Applicant’s efforts to resolve the other debts, and his accrual of approximately $16,000
of savings and retirement investments over the past five years. Under these
circumstances, I conclude that both of the above-referenced mitigating conditions apply,
and that Applicant has mitigated the security concern.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
5
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant was a teenager when he incurred the car note delinquency, his most
significant unresolved debt. He incurred another unresolved debt when he was 20 years
old. Since then, he has returned to school, gotten married, and has been steadily
employed for five years. In that time, he has begun resolving his past debts and saving
money. Considering this case in the context of the whole-person concept, I conclude
that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
