 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 14-01719 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Benjamin Flam, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana approximately eight times while in college, including once 
after she was granted a Department of Defense (DOD) interim security clearance as a 
student intern. She deliberately did not disclose her marijuana use on her October 2006 
security clearance application. She exercised poor judgment by certifying a June 2008 
application for a clearance upgrade without reviewing the form for accuracy. The drug 
involvement concerns are mitigated because of her abstinence from marijuana since 2006 
and her intent not to use any illegal drug in the future. The personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated by her efforts at rectification with remorse. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 17, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, and explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue her security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
 
 
 2 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on October 8, 2014, and she requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On June 8, 2015, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On June 29, 2015, I scheduled the hearing for July 29, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) and four Applicant exhibits 
(AEs A-D) were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s letter 
forwarding discovery to Applicant’s counsel was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) for the 
record, but was not admitted as an evidentiary exhibit. Applicant and three witnesses 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on August 6, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana at least eight 
times between September 2004 and October 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that she used 
marijuana after she was granted a DOD security clearance (SOR ¶ 1.b). Under Guideline 
E, Applicant allegedly falsified her June 2008 (SOR ¶ 2.a) and October 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.b) 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIPs) by not disclosing that she 
had used marijuana in the last seven years. 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR allegations, Applicant admitted that she used marijuana 
while in college fewer than ten times, including one time after she was granted an interim 
secret clearance. She denied any illegal drug use in the past eight years, and any intent to 
use an illegal drug in the future. She consented to automatic revocation of her security 
clearance eligibility for any future illegal drug involvement. Applicant admitted that she did 
not initially report her marijuana use on her October 2006 e-QIP, but she thereafter self-
reported her drug use to her then employer’s facility security officer (FSO). About the 
omission of her marijuana use from her June 2008 e-QIP, Applicant asserted that she 
acted on the belief that her self-report of marijuana use had been submitted to the DOD.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions to using marijuana in college fewer than ten times and to 
deliberately failing to disclose that marijuana use on her October 2006 e-QIP are accepted 
and incorporated as findings of fact. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and 
transcript, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old information assurance manager (IAM) with a top secret 
clearance and special access eligibility. She has a master’s degree in criminal justice 
awarded in December 2012 and has worked for her current employer since June 2011. 
Applicant and her spouse married in August 2013, and as of late July 2015, they were 
expecting their first child. (GE 1; AE C; Tr. 22-23, 57.) 
 
 
 3 
Applicant pursued her undergraduate degree from September 2004 to May 2008. 
While in college, she used marijuana on approximately eight occasions at parties with her 
roommates. Her last use of marijuana occurred while she held a DOD interim secret 
clearance for her duties with a defense contractor (company X). (GE 1; AE C; Tr. 25.)  
 
In June 2006, Applicant started working for company X as an intern in its security 
office. She was responsible for office tasks, including processing badges and providing 
security clearance paperwork to employees. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 21-22.) Applicant passed a drug 
screen for her internship with the defense contractor. (Tr. 25-26.) 
 
On October 4, 2006, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an e-QIP 
for a DOD secret clearance. Applicant responded negatively to inquiries concerning any 
illegal drug activity, including whether she had illegally used any controlled substance such 
as marijuana since age 16 or within the last seven years. (GE 3.) Applicant’s explanation 
for not disclosing her marijuana use is that she was “embarrassed and ashamed that [she] 
wasn’t going to get the job at [company X]” and scared that she would be precluded from 
pursuing a career in criminal justice or public service. (Tr. 24-25.) 
 
Applicant felt guilty about concealing her marijuana use from her security clearance 
paperwork. (Tr. 23.) Sometime during her winter break in December 2006 or January 2007, 
she informed her FSO about her marijuana use, initially verbally and then in writing through 
an addendum that she understood would be submitted to the DOD. (Tr. 27-29, 59.) 
Applicant prepared the addendum on her work computer at company X and did not retain a 
hard copy. (Tr. 29, 54.) Applicant was granted a secret clearance around March 2007. (GE 
1; Tr. 23.) 
 
 Applicant continued to intern with company X after college. By June 2008, her 
responsibilities in the security department had increased to require an upgrade of her 
security clearance to top secret. (Tr. 31.) On June 9, 2008, she certified to the accuracy of 
an e-QIP, which was largely consistent with her October 2006 e-QIP, excepting a change 
of current address for Applicant and for her college roommate;
1
 a change from her mother 
to her neighbor as able to verify her address in the summer of 2006; and disclosure that 
she had been granted a DOD secret clearance around June 2006 [sic]. Her June 2008 e-
QIP contains a negative response to the drug inquiries concerning whether she had 
illegally used any controlled substance since age 16 or in the last seven years, and 
whether she had ever illegally used a controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance. (GE 2; Tr. 31-32.) Applicant explained that she was asked by her FSO if 
anything had changed from her previous application. She responded “No” and was given 
the signature pages of the e-QIP, which she signed without reviewing a hard copy of the 
form. (Tr. 60.) Applicant testified that it did not occur to her at the time to review the e-QIP 
                                                 
1 
On her October 2006 e-QIP, Applicant provided her college address as her current address, which could be 
verified by her then roommate. (GE 3.) Applicant listed a neighbor as the person who could verify her current 
address on her June 2008 e-QIP.  Her college roommate is listed as the person who could verify Applicant’s 
address in college. About the roommate’s address, Applicant commented for the period September 2007 to 
May 2008: “She lived with me while we were attending college, but she now resides at [address information 
omitted].” (GE 2.) 
 
 
 4 
“because nothing had changed.” (Tr. 60.) She believed that her addendum to her October 
2006 e-QIP had been provided to the DOD by her then FSO. (Tr. 32-34, 59.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for her top secret clearance. 
She did not volunteer any information about her drug use. Applicant’s unrebutted testimony 
is that she was not asked about any drug use or asked if there was any information she 
wanted to offer. She had always been told to answer the questions asked and assumed 
her disclosure of marijuana use in college had been provided to the government.
2
 (Tr. 61-
62.) Applicant’s security clearance was upgraded to top secret in September 2008. (GE 1; 
AE B; Tr. 23, 34, 44.) Around that time, Applicant accepted a full-time position with 
company X in document control, where she transmitted and received classified documents 
on various programs. (Tr. 22.) 
 
 The security office had a negative reputation within the company for its security 
posture. In April 2009, a new FSO was transferred from another facility to correct 
deficiencies in security at Applicant’s workplace. The facility had a large volume of 
classified activity, and some security procedures were not in compliance with the National 
Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM). Two employees temporarily lost 
classified access eligibility for failure of the security office to submit security paperwork to 
the DOD. The new FSO found the paperwork in security files, but it took weeks for the 
employees to regain access. (Tr. 68-72.) In June 2009, Applicant was promoted to the 
position of industrial security specialist I, where she was essentially an information systems 
security manager (ISSM) in training. (AE C; Tr. 23.) The new FSO found her to be an 
excellent employee with no honesty or integrity issues. (Tr. 68-71.) 
 
  While certifying several computers on a classified information system in September 
2010, Applicant and two other company X ISSMs accessed system administrator privileged 
accounts without the systems administrator present. The system administrator logged onto 
a workstation and then allowed the ISSM unsupervised access to certify the system. The 
ISSMs used the accounts to efficiently complete the certification process and did not 
believe they were violating the NISPOM because they had the requisite security clearance 
and need-to-know. Once they realized that their access was improper, they self-reported 
their violation. Corrective action was delayed due to a change in supervisory personnel and 
organizational changes. (AE B; Tr. 41.) 
 
 At the end of a workday in early December 2010, Applicant secured the primary 
locking device on main door to the document control facility and ensured that the room’s 
motion sensor alarm was properly engaged. Earlier that day, a document control specialist 
had disengaged a slide bolt on double doors in document control and then failed to re-
engage the bolt. Applicant was not aware that she had to check the slide bolt in her end-of-
day checks and did not realize that the double doors were improperly secured by only a 
knob lock. Applicant became aware of the violation the next day, and she self-reported her 
                                                 
2 
A security manager at company X testified that records were purged of former employees in 2012. (Tr. 76.) If 
the addendum had been retained in company X’s files, it is no longer available. Applicant testified that when 
she resigned from company X, she had to return her work computer on which she had prepared the 
addendum. (Tr. 29.) 
 
 5 
inadvertent failure to engage the slide bolt while closing the area the previous evening. 
Company X determined that there had been no loss or compromise of classified 
information, but Applicant was given a written warning for a first violation within 12 months. 
(AE A.) In January 2011, the company completed its inquiry into the September 2010 
violation involving the computer certification process. Applicant was issued a written 
reprimand in lieu of the five-day suspension that could have been imposed for a second 
non-deliberate security breach in 12 months because she was the most junior ISSM and 
unaware that the process was not acceptable. (AE B.) 
 
 In June 2011, Applicant left company X and began working for her current employer 
as an information assurance officer. Her top secret clearance was transferred to her new 
employer. (GE 1; Tr. 23, 44.) Over the next three years, Applicant was cleared for multiple 
special access programs, and she received several performance awards from her 
employer. (AE C; Tr. 47, 93.) 
  
 On August 28, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to an e-QIP to renew her top 
secret clearance eligibility. She responded “Yes” to whether she had illegally used any drug 
or controlled substance in the last seven years, and to whether she had used any illegal 
drug while possessing a security clearance. Applicant disclosed that she used marijuana 
between approximately September 2004 and October 2006. As for the frequency of her 
use, Applicant stated: 
 
I am not sure of the exact dates of use. Once in a while my college 
roommates and I would smoke marijuana. This was approximately 8 times 
over the 2 year period only during the school year. I was in possession of it, 
but never manufactured or sold it. I used it once after I received my Security 
Clearance in October and that was the last time that I had used it. 
 
Applicant responded “No” to an e-QIP inquiry concerning any intent to use the drug in the 
future, explaining as follows: 
 
I have not used marijuana since October of 2006 and will not ever again. I 
stopped using marijuana because I hated the feeling and the smell. I also 
decided that I wanted to major in criminal justice in October 2006 and 
decided I wanted a career in criminal justice. 
 
Applicant denied any purchase of marijuana, but admitted that she had handled marijuana 
passed to her by one of her roommates. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant has abstained from any involvement with illegal drugs since 2006. On 
October 8, 2014, she executed a statement of intent to refrain from any illegal drug use in 
the future with automatic revocation of her security clearance eligibility for any violation. 
(AE C; Tr. 53-54.) She continues to associate with one of her college roommates involved 
in her marijuana use. However, this friend no longer uses marijuana. (Tr. 25.) 
 
 
 6 
  In July 2014, Applicant was promoted to her current position of information 
assurance manager. She is responsible for the overall information technology security 
posture for multiple special access programs, including wide area networks, local area 
networks, and multi-user stand-alone information technology systems. (AE C.) 
 
 Applicant’s continued security clearance eligibility is endorsed without any 
reservations by her former security manager at company X (AE D) and by security 
professionals at her current employment. (AE C.) Her security manager at company X from 
April 2009 to June 2011 would rehire her if given the opportunity. (AE D; Tr. 74.) Applicant 
was hard working and professional in fulfilling her duties. (Tr. 69.) 
 
 Concerning security professionals at Applicant’s current workplace, the director of 
security for two large business areas oversees more than 50 security professionals. He 
attests to Applicant being one of his strongest employees in a complex and dynamic 
information technology environment. She has always demonstrated reliability and 
trustworthiness when dealing with extremely sensitive information. (AE C.) Likewise, an 
information technology security manager, who has spent most of his career in security for 
special access programs, worked closely with Applicant from June 2011 until her promotion 
in August 2014. Applicant was one of two information assurance officers who supported his 
programs, and she was instrumental in establishing new policies that strengthened their 
security posture. Applicant informed him that she had smoked marijuana in college, 
including once while holding an interim security clearance. (AE C; Tr. 82-83.) She 
expressed regret about her use of marijuana. (AE C.) She also told him about the 
addendum to correct the record well before it became an issue for the DOD. (Tr. 85.) He 
believes Applicant did not knowingly withhold information while completing the paperwork 
to renew her clearance. (AE C.) 
 
 Another security manager, who has a background in criminal investigations and 
military counterintelligence, has known about Applicant’s marijuana use in college since 
October 2013, if not before then. He reviewed her file, including her latest e-QIP, and 
interviewed her to determine whether to submit a “personal access request” for special 
access eligibility at that time. (Tr. 92-96.) Applicant disclosed to him that she used 
marijuana in college and did not disclose the drug use on her initial e-QIP.
3
 (AE C; Tr. 92-
                                                 
3 
In a character reference letter submitted on Applicant’s behalf (AE C), the senior security manager indicated 
that he has known Applicant since June 2011 and first became aware of Applicant’s “youthful discretion with 
marijuana during her college days” when he reviewed her SF 86 and then interviewed Applicant. The manager 
testified at Applicant’s hearing that the company is authorized to review only the most current e-QIP. (Tr. 96.) 
He added that he was adjudicating personal access requests for the company in 2012, 2013, and 2014.  (Tr. 
96.) On redirect examination, the senior manager responded affirmatively when asked whether the e-QIP form 
he reviewed contained full disclosure of her marijuana use: 
 
She told me about the original one as part of my original interview with her. I knew about the 
incorrect first time she filled out the 86 and the advice she got at [company X]. She gave me 
all of that as—and told me that the one I was looking at was the most current and correct one 
and that it was fully truthful at that point. (Tr. 97-98.) 
 
Given that Applicant’s drug use was not reported on either the October 2006 or June 2008 e-QIPs, and the 
security manager indicated he was processing personal access requests from 2012 through 2014, it could be 
 
 7 
93.) He believes that Applicant’s denial of drug use on her initial paperwork was influenced 
by fear of not getting a job, rather than an attempt to deceive the government. As for her 
efforts to correct the misrepresentation, Applicant told him that she spoke to her then FSO 
around January 2007, who instructed her to draft a statement as an addendum to her e-
QIP. He is of the opinion that Applicant did not know until recently that her addendum had 
not been submitted to the DOD. (AE C.) He recommends Applicant for continued security 
clearance eligibility “absolutely without reservation.” (Tr. 95.) 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
                                                                                                                                                             
inferred that he learned about Applicant’s marijuana use in college from reviewing her October 2013 e-QIP. 
Yet, he also testified that Applicant brought to his attention the discrepancy on her initial e-QIP within a month 
or so of their professional relationship. (Tr. 92.) He indicated in his character reference letter that he has 
worked with Applicant on a daily basis for the past four years. (AE C.)  
 
 
 8 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is articulated in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because of Applicant’s use of marijuana 
when she was in college between approximately September 2004 and October 2006. AG ¶ 
25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, 
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” is implicated only in that 
Applicant had physical possession of marijuana passed to her by a roommate when she 
used it. There is no evidence that she purchased marijuana herself or that she kept a 
supply of the drug on hand. However, security concerns are raised by AG ¶ 25(g), “any 
illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” Applicant used marijuana on one 
occasion after she had been granted an interim secret clearance for her duties in security 
as an intern with company X. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is 
established. There is no evidence that Appellant has used marijuana since 2006. It 
happened sufficiently long ago to enable an affirmative finding that it is not likely to reoccur, 
 
 9 
particularly where her use was limited to the college environment. The circumstances of 
her drug use are not likely to reoccur. Applicant is married and has a stable career path.  
 
 Applicant has also demonstrated her intent not to abuse any illegal drug in the 
future by satisfying all four components of AG ¶ 26(b): 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
Although Applicant still associates with a college roommate with whom she smoked 
marijuana in the past, she testified credibly that this friend no longer uses marijuana. 
Applicant is no longer in the college environment that was conducive to her illegal drug use. 
Her almost nine years of abstinence as of her security clearance hearing is sufficient to 
guarantee against relapse considering that she used marijuana fewer than 10 times and 
only in social settings when the drug was passed to her. Applicant also executed a 
statement of intent to refrain from any future drug involvement, fully aware and consenting 
to automatic revocation of her security clearance for any violation. Unquestionably, 
Applicant exercised poor judgment by using marijuana after she had been granted an 
interim secret clearance, but that marijuana use is reasonably attributed to youthful 
indiscretion and is not likely to be repeated. The drug involvement concerns are mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The undisputed evidence is that Applicant falsely certified to the accuracy of her 
October 2006 when she responded negatively to whether she had used any illegal drug 
since the age of 16 or in the last seven years. AG ¶ 16(a) is established by her knowing 
falsification of her initial security clearance application. That disqualifying condition 
provides: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
 
 10 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant falsified her June 2008 e-QIP, which was 
submitted to upgrade her security clearance eligibility. Applicant has consistently denied 
that she deliberately falsified that e-QIP because she had informed her FSO about her 
marijuana use verbally and then by written addendum in late December 2006 or early 
January 2007. She had been led to believe by her then FSO that her self-report of 
marijuana use would be provided to the DOD. When it came time to submit her June 2008 
e-QIP, she was asked by the FSO whether anything had changed. She acted on the belief 
that her addendum had been submitted to the DOD and so answered negatively. Applicant 
further testified that the FSO provided her only the signature pages for the June 2008 e-
QIP, which she signed without giving any thought to reviewing the form.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, 
stating:  
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the 
omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present 
evidence to explain the omission. 
 
 The negative response to the drug inquiries on Applicant’s June 2008 e-QIP could 
support a finding of deliberate falsification, especially in the absence of any proof of the 
claimed addendum. Evidence of some updates to address information suggests that she 
either filled out the June 2008 e-QIP herself in the computer, or she provided the address 
information at some point to her employer. An address change for Applicant would likely 
have been on record with her employer. However, Applicant’s June 2008 e-QIP also 
contained updated address information for her college roommate, which would likely not 
have been known without input from Applicant. Applicant was not asked how the address 
information came to be updated if she only signed the signature pages. Furthermore, 
Applicant testified that she told the FSO about her drug use before she executed the 
addendum on the FSO’s advice. The negative response to the drug use question on 
Applicant’s June 2008 e-QIP is not easily explained unless the FSO had misplaced the 
addendum and forgotten about Applicant’s oral self-report. A security manager at company 
X testified that there were some problems in the security office, including that some 
documents involving other employees had not been submitted to the DOD. However, the 
evidence also shows that Applicant did not volunteer information about her illegal drug use 
to the investigator who interviewed her for her clearance upgrade. Her testimony is that she 
was not asked about any drug involvement; she had been told to respond only to inquiries; 
 
 11 
and believing that her addendum had been provided to the DOD, she “didn’t at that point 
think that they thought it was a big deal.” (Tr. 61-62.) Given the negative responses to the 
drug inquiries on Applicant’s October 2006 and June 2008 e-QIPs, the investigator may not 
have asked Applicant about any drug use. Even so, Applicant would have gone a long way 
toward demonstrating her good-faith had she disclosed to the investigator that she had 
used marijuana in college.  
 
 Other evidence tends to bolster her credibility, however. Current co-workers testified 
that Applicant has been forthright with them about her marijuana use in college, her failure 
to report her drug use on her initial e-QIP, and her submission of an addendum to 
company X’s FSO to correct the record. Presumably, the security manager who has vetted 
her during the personal access request process could have verified her claim of the 
addendum by contacting company X’s FSO. Applicant had no reason to know that 
company X had purged its records on former employees in 2012. She stood to risk her 
standing with her current employer and perhaps her continued employment had she 
fabricated about her efforts to rectify the record through verbal report and then an 
addendum. Applicant self-reported her security violations when she was an ISSM at 
company X. While this does not preclude her from having falsified her June 2008 e-QIP, it 
is evidence of honesty that must be considered in assessing whether to find credible her 
denial of any intent to falsify her June 2008 e-QIP. Then too, she reported her marijuana 
involvement on her August 2013 e-QIP to renew her security clearance eligibility. Given 
company X’s security manager’s testimony about the facility’s poor security posture before 
April 2009, evidenced in part by the temporary loss of security clearance eligibility for two 
employees because company X’s security officials failed to submit their paperwork, it is 
certainly conceivable that Applicant’s former FSO did not submit the addendum. After 
considering all the circumstances, I conclude that Applicant did not knowingly falsify her 
June 2008 e-QIP. At the same time, fear of not being able to work as an intern in security 
for company X or being denied the opportunity to continue in her chosen field does not 
justify her initial falsification of her October 2006 e-QIP. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 (a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” applies in mitigation of 
the October 2006 e-QIP falsification because of Applicant’s self-report to the FSO in late 
2006 or early 2007. Yet, the ameliorative impact of that self-report is undermined 
somewhat by the poor judgment she exhibited in June 2008 when she signed her e-QIP 
without taking any steps to ensure the accuracy of the information reported. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) applies because of the passage of time since the falsification, although 
her deliberate misrepresentation about then recent, if not current, marijuana use is 
considered serious and has negative implications for her security eligibility. AG ¶ 17(c) 
provides: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 12 
 Applicant’s disclosures of her past marijuana use when she completed her August 
2013 e-QIP and during vetting by her employer to sponsor her for special access programs 
implicate two other mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has been other than forthright about her marijuana use 
with her current employer. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
4
 Applicant’s marijuana use during college, including her use on one occasion while 
possessing an interim security clearance, is attributed to youthful indiscretion. Of primary 
concern in this case is Applicant’s concealment of her drug use when she applied for 
security clearance eligibility for her job as an intern with company X in its security 
department. She acted in self-interest out of concern that she would be denied the job. 
Applicant was only 20 years old at the time, but the government must be assured that 
persons with security clearance eligibility can be counted on to act in the interests of the 
United States at all times. 
 
 On graduating from college, Applicant accepted a full-time position in document 
control. Certainly by then, she should have recognized the importance of ensuring the 
accuracy of any document that she certified by her signature. Even if she did not 
deliberately conceal her drug use when she applied to renew her security clearance in 
2008, she raised considerable doubts about her judgment by attesting to the accuracy of 
an e-QIP that contained negative responses to whether she had used any illegal drug in 
the last seven years and whether she had ever used an illegal drug while possessing a 
security clearance. Applicant is credited with disclosing her marijuana use when she 
                                                 
4
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 13 
completed her August 2013 e-QIP and by informing her current employer during personal 
access request interviews. 
 
 Additionally, in the last seven years, Applicant has demonstrated that she can be 
counted on to handle classified information appropriately. Security infractions committed by 
her at company X were inadvertent, have not been repeated in her current employment, 
and were self-reported in a timely manner. Several security professionals familiar with 
Applicant’s work in the information technology security environment, including a security 
manager at company X, have no concerns about Applicant’s continued security clearance 
eligibility. Applicant has persuaded me that she understands the importance of complying 
with security requirements. After considering all the facts and circumstances, I conclude 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue her security clearance 
eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
