 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03943 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 22, 2014, and January 9, 2015, and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record. On June 22, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and it was received on July 17, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and Items 4 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence. No additional material was provided by Applicant. The case was 
assigned to me on December 9, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except ¶ 2.a, which she admitted 
with an explanation. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. She attended college, but did not earn a degree. She 
married and was divorced in 1997. She remarried in 1997 and divorced in 2000. She 
remarried in 2000 and divorced in 2010. She remarried in 2010 and is separated from 
her husband. Applicant has three children, ages 9, 10 and 12. She has been employed 
by a federal contractor since August 2013. She was unemployed for four months in 
2013. Before then she worked at various jobs, the longest term from October 2001 to 
December 2010.1 
  
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on September 19, 
2013. In response to question 26, which inquired if in the past seven years Applicant 
had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency or if she was 120 days delinquent 
on any debt, she responded “no.” During her background interview in December 2013, 
she was confronted with the numerous delinquent debts on her credit report. She 
explained her knowledge of financial affairs was extremely limited due to the loss of her 
financial records and documents because of household moves, martial disputes, and 
poor record keeping. She did not know the specific amounts of each delinquent debt. 
When asked why she responded “no” to the SCA inquiry about delinquent debts she 
indicated it was a mistake and she did not understand financial terms.2  
 
 The government investigator confronted Applicant about the delinquent debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($6,323), which is a loan for a repossessed vehicle. She acknowledged she 
and her ex-husband purchased the vehicle and due to insufficient funds she was unable 
to make the payments and the vehicle was repossessed. She also acknowledged to the 
investigator that due to insufficient funds, she was unable to pay her student loans 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.bb through 1.gg). She acknowledged that she had rented an apartment, but 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 3, 6. Applicant also answered “no” to whether she had a judgment entered against her; whether 
she was currently delinquent on any federal debt; whether she had any possessions or property 
voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed; whether she had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or canceled for failing to pay as agreed. I have not considered these answers for 
disqualifying purposes, but will consider them when analyzing Applicant’s credibility and in my whole 
person analysis.  
 
3 
 
 
was unable to pay the rent while residing there. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,296) reflects 
this debt.3  
 
During the interview, Applicant attributed her financial problems to insufficient 
wages and the expenses associated with her child who has a heart defect. She 
indicated that even when she had medical insurance, she was unable to pay the 
medical expenses that were not covered. She stated that some of the debts are her ex-
husband’s responsibility with whom she had joint accounts and became jointly liable. 
She also acknowledged she is an impulse spender and did not budget money properly.4  
 
In 2007, Applicant had approximately $53,000 of delinquent debt discharged in a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She indicated she filed bankruptcy because she earned 
insufficient wages, had medical expenses, and was unable to make timely payments on 
her debts. Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a through 1.kk, 
totaling approximately $58,907. During her background interview in December 2013, 
she indicated that after her debts were discharged in bankruptcy, she continued to 
struggle financially and have medical problems. She further stated she was still unable 
to meet necessary living expenses and make timely payments to creditors.5  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated she was making payments on the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.bb through 1.gg, which are student loans that total 
approximately $12,019. She did not provide any supporting documents to show she has 
a payment plan, or the debts are no longer delinquent and are being paid. The debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e -1.i, 1.l, 1.n, and 1.p-1.x, are medical debts totaling $5,464. The 
remaining $41,424 of delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are various consumer 
accounts. Credit reports from July 2014 and December 2013 reflect Applicant’s 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR.6 
 
It is not believable that Applicant made a mistake when she answered “no” to 
questions about whether she had past due or delinquent debts. She admitted she 
struggled to pay her living expenses and make timely payments to creditors after her 
bankruptcy. It is clear she knew she was not paying the full amount on her medical 
debts. She had two vehicles repossessed because she was unable to make the 
payments on them. She acknowledged she was responsible on joint accounts that were 
unpaid. I find Applicant intentionally failed to disclose financial delinquencies on her 
SCA. 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
6 Items 4, 5; Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had approximately $53,000 of debt discharged in bankruptcy in 2007. 
Since then, she has accumulated 37 delinquent debts totaling more than $58,000, 
which include two judgments and six delinquent student loans that she is unable or 
unwilling to pay. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant attributes her financial problems to insufficient wages and her child’s 
medical issues. These issues are beyond her control. She also indicated that she has 
delinquent accounts, held jointly with her ex-husband, which have caused her financial 
problems. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant had a clean financial slate after her debts were 
discharged in bankruptcy in 2007. She indicated after the bankruptcy she did not have 
sufficient wages to pay her living expenses and make timely payments to creditors. She 
did not provide evidence of actions she may have taken to budget her finances or 
manage her finances. She did not provide sufficient evidence of actions she has taken 
regarding any of her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant indicated in her answer to the SOR that she was making payments on 
her student loans. She failed to provide documents to substantiate her statements. She 
did not provide evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent debts. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude her financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous and there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude her financial problems occurred under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current reliably, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant does not dispute any of the 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
7 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant had debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2007. She admitted that shortly 
thereafter she was still unable to pay her living expenses and make timely payments to 
creditors. She indicated she did not budget her money properly, and she was an 
impulse spender. Applicant was aware that she voluntarily returned two vehicles to 
creditors because she could not make the payments on the loans. She was aware that 
she could not pay all of her family’s medical expenses. In response to why she failed to 
disclose she had any delinquent debts, she indicated it was a mistake, and she did not 
understand financial terms. I find her explanation is not credible. Applicant was aware 
her debts were discharged in bankruptcy and she still was earning insufficient income to 
pay all of her debts. Although she may not have been aware of the specific dollar 
amount she owed each creditor, she was aware that some accounts were not being 
paid timely. I find Applicant intentionally omitted, concealed, or falsified this information 
on her SCA. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct he omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant’s conduct was not minor, and did not happen under unique 
circumstances. Her confirmation of her delinquent debts when the government 
investigator confronted her with them does not constitute a prompt, good-faith effort to 
correct her omissions, concealments, or falsifications. Applicant had a duty to place the 
government on notice that she had financial problems, an issue she was aware of when 
she completed her SCA. She intentionally failed to disclose any derogatory financial 
information. I cannot find this behavior is unlikely to recur. Her actions cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 36 years old. She had a significant amount of debts discharged in 
bankruptcy in 2007. She continues to have financial problems and has numerous 
unpaid delinquent debts. She intentionally failed to disclose her financial problems on 
her SCA. Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.ll:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
