The Government submitted ten items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00615
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On April 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated August 24,
2015 . Applicant received the FORM on August 26, 2015. but she did not submit  a1
response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegations, with the
exception of 1.f, 1.p, 1.r, 1.s, 1.x, and 1.aa-1.bb under Guideline F. She also provided
explanations. (Item 3)
Applicant is 48 years old. She is single, and has one son and one daughter. She
graduated from high school in 1986 and attended university from 2000 to 2003, but she
has not yet obtained a degree. (Item 5) Since 2006, Applicant has been employed with
her current employer. She completed an application for a security clearance on June
28, 2013. She has never held a security clearance.
Financial
The SOR alleges 28 delinquent accounts totaling approximately $16,900. (Item
1) In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she denied all medical accounts
listed in the SOR because her health insurance company notified her that her personal
information may have been accessed in a cyberattack. (Item 4) Based on that incident
she refuses to verify the validity of 19 medical debts in the SOR. She also denied the
allegations in SOR 1.q, to a university in the amount of $2,475, and SOR 1.y, to a cable
company in the amount of $1,100.
Applicant claims that the delinquent amount she owes is about $4,390. The
reason for the delinquent debts is a combination of recent unemployment, part-time
work, and staying home to care for her son, who is disabled after being shot in the head
in 2008. (Item 6)
Applicant did not provide any information to support an assertion that the
medical debts were not her debts. In fact, she reported the medical debts in her security
clearance application and her subject interview. (Item 5 and 6) In 2014, she provided
records relating to her medical debts when answering interrogatories. (Item 7) She also
did not give a reason as to why she did not owe the debts in SOR 1.q and 1.y. 
Applicant contacted a credit counseling company, but she decided not to
complete an agreement because the payments were not manageable. She noted that if
she paid that amount for delinquent debts, she could not pay her normal household
debts. 
Applicant admits that she owes the debt alleged in SOR 1.f for a collection
account in the amount of $238. She stated that it was due to a family emergency that
caused loss of time and pay from work. She has not paid the account. 
As to the debt alleged in SOR 1.p for a charged-off account in the amount of
$435, she is negotiating payment arrangements. She gave the same explanation for the
debt in SOR 1.s for a past-due credit account in the amount of $90, with a total balance
of $341. Applicant stated that the education loan in SOR 1.r for $44,401, which is
pastdue in the amount of $1.591, is in negotiations. 
3
Applicant admits that she owes the debt in SOR 1.x in the amount of $865, but
she has not been able to pay it due to her family emergency and loss of pay from work.
She could not verify the debt in SOR 1.y in the amount of $1,100 to a cable company.
Applicant admits her indebtedness to the IRS for tax year 2010 in the amount of
$896 (1.aa) She submitted a 2015 letter that requires her to make payments of $100
per month to satisfy the delinquent debt. The payments are to be debited from her
account each month. The indebtedness to the IRS for tax year 2012 (1.bb) for $275 is
in the same status. She did not provide any proof that the payments were being made. 
Applicant admitted during her 2013 subject interview that she had acted in an
irresponsible manner by not paying her bills. She believes that the stress of caring for
her son caused duress and her inability to pay bills. She wants to pay her bills. (Item 6)
Applicant has a net monthly income of $2,270. Her personal financial statement
reflects, after expenses, she has a negative $477. She stated that she lives paycheck
to paycheck. She now believes that her only option is to file for bankruptcy, which is a
legitimate means to resolve debts. However, she has not started the process.
Applicant did not respond to the FORM to provide additional information or
documentation concerning the delinquent debts. She provided no information to show
that her financial condition has improved or changed.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
5
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt. She admits to about $4,390. Her admissions
and credit reports confirm the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the
case against her and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has not
resolved her delinquent debt. She notes that she is in the process of making payments
arrangements as of 2015. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition
(FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant had several traumas that occurred over the past years. Her
son was shot in 2008. She had some unemployment and low wages. She could not pay
her taxes. She did not provide any documentation to show that she has acted
responsibly. She attempted a credit-counseling plan, but she did not have the money to
make payments. She has denied all medical accounts based on a cyberattack. She has
not acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply
because there are no indications her financial problems are being resolved or under
control. She has good intentions to pay her bills, but a promise to pay in the future is
not sufficient for mitigation.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 48-year-old woman who is single and has two children. She encountered
many challenges that caused her financial difficulties. She has been the sole provider
for her family. She has cared for her disabled son who was shot in 2008.
Applicant has not provided sufficient mitigation to mitigate the financial
considerations security concerns. She is now contemplating bankruptcy, which is a
legitimate means to resolve delinquent debts. However, she has not started the
process. She did not submit documentation that she is in fact complying with an
agreement to repay taxes to the IRS. She has not established a track record of financial
responsibility. She has met her burden of proof in this case.
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-bb: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
