 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-016641 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 16, 2016, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
                                                          
1 The SOR incorrectly listed the ISCR case number as 14-1644. This decision correctly states the 
number as 14-1664. 
 
 
2 
 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 2015, setting the hearing for July 29, 
2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted into evidence. The Government’s exhibit list was 
marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through 
G, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s exhibit index and 
written closing argument were marked as HE II and III respectively. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. He submitted AE H and I in a 
timely manner. Those exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 6, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and has worked for a government contractor since 
2008. He is a high school graduate. He is married and has three children. He served in 
the Air Force for 21 years and retired as a master sergeant (pay grade E-7). He has 
held a security clearance for over 30 years without incident.2  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file his 2011 federal and state income tax 
returns, that he owes $868 to the IRS for his 2012 federal income taxes, and $174 for 
his 2013 federal income taxes. The SOR also alleges that he owes $303 for a collection 
account. The collection account was listed on credit reports from January 2014 and 
February 2015. Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, but denied the remaining 
allegations. His admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact.3  
 
 Applicant admitted that he was negligent when he failed to timely file his 2011 
federal and state income tax returns. He explained that he was working a second job 
(part-time) and had difficulty obtaining his W-2 form from that employer. He was also 
traveling extensively for his regular job and did not take the time to obtain the necessary 
documents to file the 2011 tax returns. His wife was unable to assist him because of her 
medical issues. He provided documentation that he filed both his 2011 federal and state 
tax returns in July 2015. He also paid all the taxes, interest, and penalties associated 
with those returns. He is up to date on all of his federal and state income tax filings and 
provided a written letter of intent stating that he will never fail to file his federal and state 
tax returns again. His 2011 federal and state income tax return filing issue is resolved.4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 6, 26-28; GE 1; AE 1. 
 
3 Answer; GE 4-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 36-39, 41, 43-45; AE C-D, H-I. 
 
 
3 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d ($868; $174): 
 Applicant provided documentation that both amounts allegedly owed to the IRS 
for tax years 2012 and 2013 were paid at the time the tax returns were timely filed. 
These debts were never delinquent and are resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e ($303): 
 
 Applicant provided supporting documentation that this delinquent account was 
not his. His son, who has the same first and last name as Applicant, opened this 
account in his own name. The creditor misidentified Applicant as the owner when the 
son stopped paying the account and it became delinquent. Once Applicant became 
aware of the account he paid it, even though it was not his responsibility, in order to 
clear the matter up. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial worksheet showing that he currently has 
discretionary income of about $1,500 at the end of each month. He has about $54,000 
in a retirement account. He is current on all of his financial obligations. He received 
financial counseling in either 2010 or 2011.7 
 
 Applicant presented letters of support from a coworker and a supervisor who 
both describe his loyalty, strong work ethic, trustworthiness, and ethical values. Both 
recommend that he retain his security clearance. He also presented his performance 
appraisals for 2013 through 2015, which show that he is a valued employee whose 
performance meets expected requirements.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 52; AE A, B (p. 1), C.  
 
6 Tr. at 47; AE G. 
 
7 Tr. at 54, 56-58; AE A. 
 
8 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
5 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2011 federal and state income tax returns. AG ¶ 
19(g) applies. He supplied documentation showing that he timely paid his 2012 and 
2013 federal tax liability as required and that there was never a delinquent amount for 
those tax years. He also provided documentation showing that the telecommunications 
account was not his. He paid the account anyway to resolve the issue. The evidence is 
insufficient to raise disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as they 
might relate to SOR ¶¶ 1.c -1.e. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In 2015, Applicant filed the returns and paid the taxes owed for both his 2011 
federal and state income taxes. He acknowledged that he was negligent in tracking 
down the necessary documents to complete the returns. Since then, he has timely filed 
all federal and state income tax returns. He intends to always file his tax returns as 
required. He is current on all other obligations and has about $1,500 in monthly 
discretionary income. He received financial counseling in 2010 or 2011. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s 21 years of military service and his years of federal 
contractor service. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances 
that led to his tax issues. He took action to resolve his taxes. I find it unlikely that 
Applicant will find himself in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant refuted and mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
