1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
          )       ISCR Case No. 14-05357
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On December 29, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 18, 2015. A notice of hearing
was issued on September 11, 2015, scheduling the hearing for November 5, 2015.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-3 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified, presented the testimony of one witness,  and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX)
A-C, which were admitted without objection. The transcript was received on November
13, 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F, with the exception of 1.b and 1.e.  She provided explanations for each
alleged debt.
 
Applicant is 50 years old. She graduated from high school and received an
associate’s degree in 1984. Applicant is married and has one adult daughter. She has
been with her current employer since 1984 where she serves as a senior administrator.
She completed a security clearance application in 2013. (GX 1) Applicant has held a
security clearance since 1984.
The SOR alleges approximately $102,000 in delinquent debt, which includes
student loans, and collection accounts. (GX 2 and 3) Applicant believes that she is
responsible for about $65,000 in delinquent debt.
Applicant cites to a 2007 illness that forced her mother to move in with her and
required Applicant to be responsible for her mother’s medical and financial needs. (AX
C) When Applicant’s mother died in 2012, she had to pay her property taxes. In addition,
Applicant’s husband earned a salary in the range of $30,000, which did not provide
benefits. (Tr. 52)
In 2011, Applicant became ill and was on long-term disability for one year. She
returned to work in 2012 on a contract basis. She attempted to obtain money from her
retirement plan based on hardship. She was refused. (AX C)
As to SOR allegation 1.a for an amount of $33,695, Applicant co-signed a student
loan for her daughter in 2007. After the first year her daughter decided not to return to
school. Applicant was not expecting to pay for the loan until the daughter had completed
college in four years. She tried to obtain some tuition money from the school but was not
successful at first. The loan became due in 2008. Applicant claims the loan became
delinquent in February 2009. (Tr. 27) Applicant’s daughter made some payments on the
student loan, but the amount she paid was not clear. Applicant stated that her daughter
will make payments on the loan in the amount of about $275 a month. In 2015, Applicant
received a refund of about $10,000 from the school. (Tr. 43)
In 2007, Applicant opened an account for a loan in the amount of $50,000, which
is the debt  alleged in 1.b. The amount of the debt is now $37,300.  She made payments
on the loan from 2007 until 2010. (AX B) She became very ill and had two surgeries
during the period of March 2011 to April 2012. (Tr. 33, AX C) She was on disability for a
period of time. She made sporadic payments of perhaps $1,000. She has a 2012
judgment in the amount of $37,300 that is not paid. She states that she tried to make
more payments, but learned that the account was charged-off. (Tr. 37) Her last
payments were made in 2013. 
3
As to the debt in 1.c for a medical collection account in the amount of $139,
Applicant initially denied the debt, but paid the debt in 2015. She submitted a receipt for
the payment. (AX A)
As to the debt in 1.d for a collection account in the amount of $30,983, Applicant
obtained a loan in 2008. She stated that the loan was “closed out” in 2010, but was
unpaid. (Tr. 40) She did not pay the debt, and it no longer appears on her credit report.
(Tr. 32)
As to the debt in 1.e for a collection account in the amount of $55, Applicant
denied that she owes any money for such an account. She has no knowledge of the
account and it does not appear on her credit report.  She was not successful in locating
the original creditor. (Answer to SOR)
Applicant’s daughter signed an affidavit on January 17, 2015, which stated that
she would accept responsibility for the 2007 student loan ($30,983) and a second loan
from 2008 which totals $33,695. In that affidavit she relieves her mother as co-signer for
the two loans. There is no documentation that Applicant’s daughter is making any
payments.
Applicant’s annual salary is about $72,000. She estimates that she has a net
monthly remainder of about $500. (Tr. 52) Applicant is current on her daily expenses,
mortgage, and car payment. She has not incurred any new debts. 
Applicant’s colleague testified that he has known her for about four years. He
sees her at work on a daily basis. He describes Applicant as diligent, dependable, and
responsible. (Tr. 61) He is aware of the security concerns regarding Applicant’s finances.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. 
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that she incurred delinquent debt for student loans, one
judgment, and collection accounts. Her credit reports confirm the debts. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the
case against her and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant has unresolved debt
from 2008 due to the student loan that she co-signed with her daughter, and another
loan that she obtained for herself which has been charged-off. She states that she
recently started payments on one loan. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does
not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant was seriously ill and on
disability for a time. She cared for her ill mother and paid property taxes for her.
However, she has been steadily employed since 2013. She paid two small debts
recently. She has not incurred new debts. She has unresolved debt in an approximate
amount of $90,000, and she has made no efforts to pay them, but relied on the fact that
the accounts are not on the credit report and were “charged-off.”   
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant as noted above
recently took steps to pay some small debts. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications
that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 50 years old.  She has been with her current employer since 1984. She is
married and has one adult daughter. She has held a security clearance for many years.
She is recommended by a colleague for a security clearance. She encountered
circumstances beyond her control including illness, her daughter’s failure to pay student
loans, and the need to care for her mother.
Applicant did not  provide sufficient information concerning a resolution of her
debts. She receives some mitigation for the two small debts that she paid. However, she
knew of the Government’s concern about her finances since the 2014 SOR. She relied
on a large account that was charged off for which she believes she has no responsibility.
She has not shown a meaningful track record of payments to mitigate the security
concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant did not persuade me that she refuted or mitigated the Government’s
case concerning the financial considerations security concerns. Any doubts must be
resolved in the Government’s favor. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
