 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01515 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Don Awerkamp, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns raised by her decision to strategically default on a mortgage loan. For 
two years, Applicant made a good-faith effort to honor the terms of her mortgage 
obligation. She made the decision to strategically default on a mortgage loan after 
consulting her financial planner and at least two real estate attorneys. She acted 
responsibly in light of her circumstances. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 25, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing 
convened on November 18, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 
and Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely 
submitted AEs B through H, which I admitted without objection.2 I received the transcript 
(Tr.) on November 26, 2014. 
 
Administrative Notice Documents 
 
Applicant offered documents regarding State 1’s anti-deficiency statute and case 
law interpreting the statute. These documents are appended to the record as HE I 
through IV, without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 33, has worked as an employee of a federal contractor since 2005. 
She has held a security clearance since approximately July 2008, without incident. In 
August 2013, Applicant reported the foreclosure of her rental property to her employer’s 
facility security officer (FSO). The resulting adverse information report triggered the 
current reinvestigation and adjudication. The SOR contains a single allegation that 
Applicant is indebted to a mortgage lender for approximately $118,300 on a foreclosed 
property.3  
 
 Applicant purchased her first home, a 950 square foot townhome, in 2006. She 
purchased the property for $159,900 using 80/20 financing. Under this structure, the 
mortgage is secured by two loans, the first for 80% of the purchase price and a second 
loan for the remaining 20%. Applicant testified that she did not fully understand the 
terms of the mortgage loans. After purchasing the property, Applicant invested $15,000 
of her savings into improving the property. Applicant and her husband continued to live 
in the home after their marriage in 2009. When they were ready to start a family, the 
couple decided to buy a larger home in a better neighborhood. By the time they were 
ready to sell the townhouse in 2010, the value of the property had fallen by 50 percent. 
Comparable home sales in the area showed a similar decline in property values as well 
as an increasing number of short sales and home foreclosures. Unable to sell the home, 
Applicant decided to convert it into a rental property when she and her husband moved 
into their new home in July 2010.4  
 
                                                          
2 The correspondence related to the Applicant’s post-hearing submissions are appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) V. 
 
3 Tr. 24-25; GE 1-2. 
 
4 Tr. 16-18; GE 3.  
 
3 
 
 While Applicant was pregnant with her first child, she took a hard look at her 
finances. At the time, the mortgage loans were Applicant’s only debts. Although she 
priced the townhome at the high end of the rental market, the property operated at a 
loss. On average, Applicant paid $500 each month to cover the expenses related to the 
property. Although she did not have any other consumer debt, Applicant knew that her 
expenses would increase with the birth of her child. The couple needed new vehicles 
and would have to incur costs for daycare. Applicant consulted her financial planner 
who advised her that the second loan on the property has a term of 15 years and 
required a balloon payment at the end of the term to satisfy the mortgage. The financial 
planner informed Applicant that it was unlikely that she would ever recuperate her 
investment in the property and warned her that she was at risk of depleting her savings 
or becoming reliant on credit cards to meet her obligations under the terms of the 
mortgage loans. The financial planner advised Applicant to strategically default on the 
mortgage and referred her to a real estate attorney.5   
 
The real estate attorney advised Applicant of the state’s anti-deficiency law and 
suggested that she execute a strategic default on the property if she was unable to 
modify the terms of the mortgage loan with the lender. Because Applicant did not feel 
comfortable with the idea of defaulting on a financial obligation, she consulted another 
real estate attorney, whose advice echoed the first attorney’s recommendation. As she 
consulted attorneys, Applicant also sought the advice of a friend who worked in her 
employer’s security department about the impact of a strategic default on her security 
clearance. Applicant’s friend advised her to make the best decision she could, to keep 
written records, and to report the foreclosure when it occurred. Applicant decided to 
continue paying the mortgage on the property and seek a mortgage modification. She 
did not qualify for a loan modification with her lender, nor did she qualify for any relief 
programs available at the time. The lender did not give Applicant the option to short sale 
the property.6  
 
 Applicant made her last mortgage payment on the townhome in April 2012. Six 
months after she stopped paying the mortgage, the lender offered her a trial 
modification. Applicant participated in the trial modification for two months in November 
and December 2012, but decided to abandon it after the lender informed her that 
successful completion of the trial program did not guarantee a permanent modification 
arrangement. Pregnant with her second child, Applicant and her husband reevaluated 
their decision to keep the townhouse. Although they had been able to rent the 
townhome for 22 of the 30 months they held the property as a rental unit, they had paid 
approximately $16,500 out of pocket to cover the deficiency between the rental income 
and the expenses on the property. Applicant was also concerned that the looming 
balloon payment on the second mortgage would cause her family a significant financial 
hardship. Applicant testified that she and her husband lamented over the decision and 
sought advice from family members and close friends. Ultimately, Applicant and her 
husband decided that maintaining the property was not in the best interest of their 
                                                          
5 Tr. 18-20. AE H. 
 
6 Tr. 21-23, 31-32, 35. 
 
 
4 
 
growing family.  Although Applicant defaulted on the mortgage, she continued to pay the 
monthly home owner’s association fee until the housing records showed that she no 
longer owned the property.7  
 
 In September 2012, the lender gave Applicant notice that the home would be 
sold pursuant to the deed of trust on the property. The home was offered for sale at 
auction in December 2012, during the time Applicant was participating in the trial 
modification program. The lenders report both mortgages as having no outstanding 
balance. The property sold in May 2013. Applicant has since worked with her financial 
planner and tax preparer to ensure that she treated the disposition of the property 
appropriately on her federal tax return.8 
 
 Applicant and her husband have a household income of approximately $160,000. 
They live within their means and use consumer credit sparingly. Together they have 
amassed liquid savings totaling approximately $10,000, and have retirement savings of 
about $300,000. Aside from the strategic default on the townhome, Applicant has a 
positive credit history and a credit score in the high 700s.9  
                            
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 23-24, 32-33; AE H. 
 
8 Tr. 37, 44-45; GE 4; AEs A, D. 
 
9 Tr. 37-39; Answer. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”10 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to one creditor, a mortgage lender, 
for approximately $118,000 on a foreclosed mortgage. Applicant admits that she 
strategically defaulted on the mortgage to avail herself of the protection offered under 
her state’s anti-deficiency law. Applicant’s admission is sufficient evidence of her 
unwillingness to repay her debts and her history, albeit a limited one, of not paying her 
debts. 11  
 
 However, the record contains evidence that mitigates these concerns. Citing her 
state’s anti-deficiency law, Applicant argues that she is not legally responsible for the 
debt alleged in the SOR. In relevant part, the statute reads: 
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c). 
 
 
6 
 
 
If a trust property of two and one-half aces or less which is limited to and 
utilized for either a single one-family or a single two-family dwelling is sold 
pursuant to the trustee’s power of sale, no action may be maintained to 
recover any difference in the amount obtained by the sale and the amount 
of the indebtedness and any interest, costs, and expenses.12 
 
In enacting the statute, the State’s legislature intended to protect certain homeowners 
from the financial disasters of losing their homes to foreclosure plus all of their other 
non-exempt property on the execution of a judgment for the balance of the purchase 
price.13 As long as the subject property fits the description in the statute, the protection 
applies to primary residences and investment properties.14 While resolving issues of 
state law is not ideal in the context of security clearance cases, in cases such as this 
one where the statutory language is clear on its face, and the case law interpreting the 
statute is also clear, the speculation or conjecture regarding the applicability of the 
statute is absent. Applicant’s property falls within the requirement outlined in the statute; 
as a result, the lender cannot recover the deficiency balances on the loan from her. 
Accordingly, Applicant is not responsible for the debt as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
  
 A finding that the SOR debts are legally uncollectible does not end the inquiry 
into Applicant’s security worthiness; the facts and circumstances surrounding an 
applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner must 
also be examined.15 Applicant acted responsibly, with every intention to comply with the 
terms of her mortgage loan. Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control, the severe 
devaluation of her home caused by the nation-wide crash of the real estate market, put 
her in a financial bind she could not have foreseen or prevented. Applicant’s decision to 
strategically default on the mortgage loan came after she made a good-faith effort over 
two years, at a cost of $16,500, to fulfill her legal obligations to her creditor. She acted 
responsibly in light of her circumstances by seeking advice from her financial planner 
and three real estate attorneys. Only after her attempts to obtain a loan modification 
failed and her advisors warned her that her financial health was in jeopardy did she 
finally take advantage of her state’s anti-deficiency law. Her decision to strategically 
default on the townhome does not cast doubt on her continued security worthiness. She 
also self-reported the issue to her FSO as required, showing her willingness to comply 
with security regulations and eliminating the issue as potential source of vulnerability or 
exploitation. Furthermore, Applicant does not have a history of financial problems or a 
habit of being fiscally irresponsible.  Her finances are otherwise under control.16  
 
                                                          
12 HE II; See also HE I. 
 
13 HE IV. 
 
14 See Nothern Arizona Properties v. Pinetop Properties Group, 804 P.2d 501 (App. 1986). 
 
15See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
  
16  See AG ¶¶ 20 (a)-(e). 
 
 
7 
 
I have no doubts or reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The purpose of a security 
clearance case is not to assign guilt or blame and then punish or sanction a person for 
their past actions. Likewise a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts. 
Nor is an applicant required to commit acts of financial martyrdom to maintain a security 
clearance. Rather the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a 
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the personal is an acceptable 
security risk.”17 Applicant found herself stuck between her desire to honor the legal 
obligation to her creditor and maintaining her otherwise-stable finances. In finding an 
appropriate solution to the problem, Applicant has handled her obligations as a 
clearance holder appropriately. In doing so, she has proven that she takes the duties 
attendant to her fiduciary relationship with the Government seriously and that she 
continues to be worthy of the Government’s trust and confidence. Clearance is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 AG ¶ 2(a). 
