1Item 2.
2 Item 1. (Department Counsel failed to provide a copy of the original SOR, but it is fully contained in the
Applicant’s Reply to the SOR in Item 1.)
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05241
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 30, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge:
Applicant possesses a valid Nigerian passport. Resulting security concerns were
not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on March 25, 2014.1
On February 7, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference).2 The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
3Item 1.
4Item 3 is inadmissible and will not be considered or cited as evidence in this decision. It comprises an
unsworn summary of an interview with Applicant by investigators from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) that was conducted March 24, 2014. Per Directive ¶ E3.1.20, these summaries are inadmissible
without having been adopted by Applicant, or presentation of evidence from an authenticating witness. 
5Item 2.
6Item 2.
2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR, dated March 10, 2015, and
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.3 Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on
August 24, 2015, containing three Items.4 A complete copy of the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of
his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on August 31, 2015. He submitted no additional material in response to the FORM,
made no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did not request
additional time to respond. I received the case assignment on November 5, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 37 years old. He was born in Nigeria and immigrated to the United
States in November 1987. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in July 1994. He has
worked for a government contractor since April 2013. He earned a master’s degree in
2006 and a doctorate in 2008 from a prestigious U.S. university.5 
On Applicant’s SF-86, he disclosed that he possesses dual citizenship with both
Nigeria and the United States. He retains a valid Nigerian passport, issued to him on
November 14, 2012. It is valid until November 13, 2017. He also disclosed he has “not
taken any action to renounce [his] Nigerian citizenship.” He traveled to Nigeria using his
Nigerian passport in December 2012 to January 2013. 6
The record lacks evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s professional
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. No character
witnesses provided statements describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or
3
reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
4
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in
AG ¶ 9:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport.
Applicant possesses a valid Nigerian passport. The evidence is sufficient to raise
the above disqualifying condition.
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
and
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.
Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based solely on his parent’s citizenship or birth
in Nigeria. Applicant chose to retain his Nigerian citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen. He actively exercised his Nigerian citizenship by renewing and acquiring a
Nigerian passport. AG ¶ 11(a) does not provide mitigation. 
Applicant has not expressed a willingness to renounce his dual citizenship with
Nigeria. He failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 11(b).
5
Applicant has not provided any evidence that the passport has been destroyed,
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. He failed to
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 11(e).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to possess
a valid Nigerian passport. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his foreign preference.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Jennifer I. Goldstein
Administrative Judge
