 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05391 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esquire  
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s solicitation of prostitution was a one-time, isolated criminal offense. 
There is no other evidence of sexual behavior or criminal conduct to raise security 
concerns. His prompt disclosure of his arrest to his facility security officer, guilty plea, 
remedial security training, good character, and productive service to his employer serve 
as evidence of his rehabilitation. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 27, 2014. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline J (criminal conduct) and Guideline D (sexual 
behavior) on April 4, 2015.1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 15, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
July 1, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on August 3, 2015, scheduling a hearing for September 22, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted exhibit A, with Tabs 1 
through 12. All exhibits were made part of the record without objections. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 30, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant admitted all the factual 
allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a complete and thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact:  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old mechanical project engineer employed by a federal 
contractor. He attended college and received his bachelor’s degree in mechanical 
engineering in 1992. He then worked for private, commercial companies until he was 
hired by a federal contractor in June 2000. Applicant has been married for 21 years to 
his high school sweetheart, and they have three children, ages 17, 15, and 13.  
 
Applicant worked for a federal contractor from 2000 to August 2010, when he 
was laid off because of a reduction in force. He was hired by his current employer, 
another federal contractor, in August 2011. Applicant was granted a top secret security 
clearance in 2000. Aside from the pending SOR allegations, there is no evidence of any 
other security clearance issues or concerns. (AE 3) 
 
In August 2014, Applicant pleaded guilty to soliciting prostitution, a misdemeanor 
offense. He was placed on 18-months unsupervised probation before judgment, and 
fined $500. His period of unsupervised probation will end on February 22, 2016. 
 
Applicant explained that he has been suffering from neck and back problems 
since 2004. He frequently visited a massage parlor for therapy purposes. (AE 1) His 
wife also visited the same massage parlor, and she confirmed his neck and back 
problems. In June 2014, Applicant called the masseuse he usually visits, and was told 
that she was not available. He used a web page to look for a close-by massage parlor. 
He called the advertised phone number, and was given an appointment and an 
address.  
 
Applicant drove to the address provided and could not find the massage parlor in 
the mall area. When he called the massage parlor, he was told to come over to the hotel 
across the street from the mall. When he arrived, two women offered Applicant sexual 
services for money. Applicant accepted, and he was arrested for soliciting prostitution. 
 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Applicant testified that he was not looking for sexual services. His intent was to 
get a massage to alleviate his neck and back problems. However, he was tempted by 
the offer and had the bad judgment to accept the sex for money offer.  
 
After his arrest that Friday, Applicant called his wife and asked her to come and 
pick him up because his car was impounded. He then disclosed his predicament to his 
wife and they discussed their situation over the weekend. On Monday, Applicant 
retained the services of an attorney and recovered his car. On Tuesday, Applicant’s first 
day at work after he was arrested, he disclosed the circumstances of his arrest to his 
facility security officer (FSO). Applicant’s arrest was published in the town newspaper 
and his wife received several calls from her friends asking about it. 
 
Applicant testified that this was the first time he ever solicited anyone for sexual 
services or that he had been involved in sex-related misconduct. He attributed his lack 
of judgment to having marital problems. Notwithstanding his misconduct, Applicant and 
his wife decided to salvage their marriage and are attending marital counseling. In 
retrospect, Applicant believes that he engaged in “very stupid behavior.” (Tr. 33) He has 
been with his wife 28 years (7 years dating and 21 married). He acknowledged that he 
made a huge mistake by risking his family and his job. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse and regret for his criminal misconduct. He 
believes that he is a responsible and conscientious parent and husband. Applicant’s 
work references believe him to be a dedicated, hard-working, and respected 
professional. His performance evaluations indicate Applicant meets or exceeds 
expectations, and makes significant contributions to his employer. Applicant has 
established a reputation for complying with security rules and regulations. He received 
two security awards for his zealous adherence to security rules. He also presented 
performance commendations and certificates of completion of security training. His 
references consider Applicant’s sexual-related misconduct as an aberration. They 
recommended his eligibility for a security clearance.  
  
Applicant likes his current job and believes that he is a valuable asset to his 
employer. He understands the responsibilities associated with maintaining eligibility for 
a security clearance. Applicant promised to never engage in criminal misconduct in the 
future.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides three disqualifying conditions relating to sexual behavior that 
apply to this case, raise a security concern, and may be disqualifying:  
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
  In August 2014, Applicant was convicted of prostitution solicitation, a 
misdemeanor offense. Applicant’s sexual behavior exposed him to criminal charges; 
made him vulnerable to possible coercion, exploitation, and duress; and reflected lack 
of judgment and discretion. AG ¶¶ 13(a), (c), and (d) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 14 lists conditions that could mitigate the sexual behavior security 
concerns.  
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
AG ¶ 14(b) and (c) apply and mitigate the sexual behavior security concerns. I 
considered that Applicant’s sexual-related incident occurred in August 2014, and his 
period of probation will not expire until February 2016. Nevertheless, considering 
Applicant’s one-time sexual-related incident in light of his 15 years of outstanding 
service and accomplishments, on balance, his past sexual behavior does not raise 
questions about his current reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
 There is no evidence to show that Applicant was involved in any other sexual 
behavior or criminal misconduct before or after his August 2014 conviction. Applicant 
has a reputation for being a law-abiding citizen, a dedicated father, and a hard-working 
and respected professional. His performance evaluations indicate Applicant meets or 
exceeds expectations, and makes significant contributions to his employer. Moreover, 
he has established a reputation for complying with security rules and regulations 
Applicant’s criminal misconduct appears to be an aberrational occurrence caused by a 
one-time lapse of judgment.  
 
 Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his misconduct, and credibly promised 
never to engage in similar misconduct. Additionally, because his wife, employer, his 
community, and the Government have knowledge of his criminal misconduct, the 
behavior no longer makes him vulnerable to possible coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 In August 2014, Applicant was convicted of prostitution solicitation, a 
misdemeanor offense. His criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) 
“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 For the same reasons discussed under the sexual behavior guideline, 
incorporated herein, I find that AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) apply and mitigate the criminal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline J in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 46, has been working for federal contractors, and has possessed a 
security clearance since 2000. There is no evidence of any other issues of security 
concern. Applicant promptly disclosed his 2014 arrest to his FSO, and has been candid 
and forthcoming during the security clearance process. His good service to his 
employer, reputation for following security rules and regulations, and credible contrition 
serve as evidence of his rehabilitation. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns pertaining to sexual behavior and 
criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
