 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 14-04802 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, dating back to before 2008. He has 
delinquent debts that are not paid or resolved. Financial security concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 In April 2014 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). On March 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On March 30, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On July 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On August 19, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing 
Notice of Video Teleconference Hearing, setting the case for September 9, 2015. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C into 
evidence. All exhibits were admitted. The record remained open until September 30, 
2015, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit more evidence pertinent to his 
delinquent debts. Applicant did not submit additional information. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 17, 2015.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e.  He denied 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f.   His admissions are accepted as factual 
findings. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and married to his second wife for eight years. He has 
three children, ages 18, 20, and 21, from his first marriage. He served in the Air Force 
from 1993 to 1997, at which time he received a general discharge under honorable 
conditions. His rank was E-2. He began his current position with a defense contractor in 
June 2014. Prior to that, he worked for a private company for nine months. He was 
unemployed for four months in 2008, and for eight months from 1999 to 2000. (Tr. 15-
19.) He held a Secret security clearance while in the Air Force, and while employed with 
another defense contractor for a period of time beginning in 2005. (Tr. 8.)  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problem to periods of unemployment and 
garnishments for unpaid child support. All of his child support and arrears are now paid 
and his children have reached their majority. (Tr. 20.) More recently, he incurred 
medical bills, which he said he needs to pay first. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant’s current annual salary is $69,000 or about $1,900 bi-weekly. (Tr. 19-
20.) He does not have a written budget. (Tr. 19.) After paying bills, he has about $700 
remaining at the end of each month. He said he is current with all ongoing bills. (Tr. 22.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from April 2014 and March 2015, the SOR 
alleged five delinquent debts and one unpaid judgment totaling $19,664. The status of 
each allegation is as follows.  
 
1 (¶ 1.a) Applicant settled this $2,325 debt that became delinquent in early 
2014 and was owed to an apartment complex. In July 2015 he paid $2,000 to 
resolve it. (Tr. 25; AE A, C.) 
 
2. (¶ 1.b) Applicant disputed this $370 debt owed to a cell phone company. 
The creditor removed it from his credit report in April 2015. (Tr. 26; Answer.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
3. (¶ 1.c) Applicant said he was unaware of this 2008 judgment for $810. He 
said he disputed the debt online in March or April 2015. (Tr. 28-29.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
4. (¶ 1.d) Applicant denied owing this $15,234 delinquent account after an 
automobile repossession. He took out the auto loan in September 2012 and 
paid $666 a month until February 2013. He said he returned the car because 
the automobile vendor did not perform according to their contract. He 
disclosed this debt in his April 2014 e-QIP, and stated he was awaiting a 
response from the creditor and that he may be responsible for the full amount. 
(GE 1.) He testified that he sent three letters to the creditor to dispute the 
matter. He sent the last letter in March 2015. (Tr. 31-32.) It is unresolved. 
 
5. (¶ 1.e) This $546 debt is from 2013 and is owed to a utility company. He 
offered a settlement in March 2015 but the company refused his offer. He 
said he will save money to make that payment after he pays a $900 medical 
bill. (Tr. 33.) It is unresolved.  
 
6. (¶ 1.f) Applicant said that he has no knowledge of this $379 debt from 
2010. After receiving the Government’s discovery he did not investigate the 
debt, which appears on his April 2014 CBR. He said it does not appear on his 
March 2015 CBR. (Tr. 33; GE 2; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
Applicant provided evidence that he resolved $2,695 of the $19,664  delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. Approximately $16,969 of the alleged amount remains 
unresolved, the largest debt being from the automobile repossession. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant obtained credit or financial counseling. He 
did not provide a workable plan or budget from which his ability to resolve the remaining 
delinquencies and avoid additional debt problems can be predicted with any certainty. 
He submitted no evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, or the 
level of responsibility his duties entail. He provided no character references describing 
his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Since before 2008, Applicant accumulated numerous delinquent debts that he 
has been unable or unwilling to resolve. The evidence is sufficient to raise both 
disqualifications, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate 
those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems have been ongoing since 2008 and continue into 
the present. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not provide mitigation. Applicant has experienced 
some periods of unemployment, and more recently has incurred medical bills, which 
were circumstances beyond his control. However, he provided insufficient evidence that 
he acted responsibly while the debts were accumulating over the years; hence, AG ¶ 
 
 
6 
 
 
20(b) has limited application. He did not offer any evidence that he received credit or 
budgetary counseling, and there are no indications that his finances are under control. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) was not established. He settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
indicating a good-faith effort to resolve that debt and establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(d) as to that debt. His successful dispute of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b established 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) as to that debt.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, 
intelligent 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a former airman and 
employee of another defense contractor. He held a security clearance in the past. While 
those are positive factors, his history of financial problems, which seemingly started 
before the 2008 judgment was entered, is concerning. Although he noted in his April 
2014 e-QIP that he was trying to resolve the $15,000 automobile repossession, he did 
not submit any evidence documenting his previous efforts or indications that he is closer 
to a resolution of the matter. He apparently does not work with a written family budget 
nor has he sought financial counseling or assistance over the years. Until he 
establishes a track record of financial reliability, the evidence leaves me with concerns 
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant did 
not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c through 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
