 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06467 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the security concern under Guideline E (personal conduct), but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, Department of 
Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) in 
February 2015, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD in 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. On July 17, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents marked as Items 1 through 5. On 
August 10, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM and was given 30 days from 
its receipt to submit objections and provide additional information. Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had three delinquent debts totaling $66,141 and 
falsified his SCA by failing to disclose those debts were turned over to collection 
agencies. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts and failed 
to address the falsification allegation. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.1 
 
 Applicant is a 76-year-old engineer who has been working for a defense 
contractor since 1996. He reported no military service. He has been married twice. He 
married his current wife in 1989. He listed no children in his SCA, but indicated in his 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview that he had six adult children. This is 
the first time that he is seeking a security clearance.2 
 
 In his SCA dated April 4, 2015, Applicant responded “no” to all of the financial 
record questions in Section 26, including the question that asked if he had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency in the past seven years. This question directed that 
he include financial obligations for which he was the sole debtor as well as those for 
which he was a cosigner. In his OPM interview, Applicant indicated that he failed to list 
the delinquent debts on his SCA due to oversight.3 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($4,660) 
was for a two-hour ambulance ride from a hospital to his hometown. He referred to this 
debt as a “ridiculous amount.” This debt had a date of last activity of November 2013. 
He provided no evidence that this debt has been, or is being, resolved.4 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,855) 
was charged to him by his grandson without his knowledge. He also stated that it had 
                                                          
1 Item 1. 
 
2 Items 2 and 5. In his SCA, Applicant listed that he was self-employed. In his OPM interview, he 
indicated that he worked for a company. 
 
3 Items 2 and 5.  
 
4 Items 1 and 3. This debt is not reflected on the Applicant’s most recent credit report dated July 15, 
2015. See Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
been paid. This debt had a date of last activity of July 2013. A credit report dated July 
15, 2015, reflected this debt had been paid off for less than the full balance.5 
  
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($49,626) 
was for a loan that his son obtained in his name. He also stated, “I did not pay attention 
if he informed me,” apparently implying that he was not aware of the loan. He further 
noted that he did not know that his son was not paying the debt and would speak to him 
about it. This debt had a date of last activity of April 2014. He provided no evidence that 
this debt has been, or is being, resolved. His credit report dated July 15, 2015, reflected 
that the balance of this delinquent debt had increased to $62,879.6 
 
 No evidence was presented that Applicant has received financial counseling or 
disputed any of the debts. Information about Applicant’s income and expenses is 
unknown.7 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
5 Items 1, 3, and 4.   
 
6 Items 1, 3, and 4.   
 
7 Items 1-5. 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
5 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. He paid the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.b. The status of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is unknown. Although he stated that he did 
not know of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, he failed to establish that he has acted responsibly in 
addressing that debt. No proof was presented that he disputed any of the debts. In 
general, insufficient evidence was presented to show that his financial problems are 
being resolved. Those problems continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), 20(c), and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
In his OPM interview, Applicant indicated that he failed to list his delinquent debts 
in his SCA due to oversight. He also failed to list his children and made mistakes in 
reporting his employment. His explanation for omitting the debts is believable. Although 
his carelessness in completing his SCA is troubling, it does not amount to a deliberate 
falsification. I find in favor of Applicant on the Guideline E allegation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.8 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. His financial problems leave me with doubts as to his current 
eligibility to access classified information. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
                                                          
8 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
   Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
