 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 14-02500 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana between August 2001 and late December 2012, including 
after he was granted a Department of Defense (DOD) security clearance. He recalls two 
occasions where he used marijuana from 2011 through 2012, although he admits that he 
could possibly have used it two more times during that period. Applicant denies any future 
intent to use marijuana, but he could not rule out future use. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 14, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
1
 detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, and explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue his security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
                                                 
1 
Applicant’s last name was misspelled and the case number was incorrect in the SOR. 
 
 
 2 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on October 29, 2014, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On June 8, 2015, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On June 29, 2015, I scheduled the hearing for July 29, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s letter forwarding discovery to Applicant on 
February 5, 2015, was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) for the record, but was not 
admitted as an evidentiary exhibit. Applicant and his father testified, as reflected in a 
transcript (Tr.) received on August 6, 2015. 
 
I held the record open until August 14, 2015, for post-hearing submissions from 
Applicant. No documents were received by the deadline, so the record closed on that date. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency from approximately August 2001 to December 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a), including after 
he had been granted a security clearance in January 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Under Guideline 
E, Applicant allegedly falsified his August 2011 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIPs) by indicating that he had used marijuana only from October 2005 to 
November 2005 when he was a sophomore in college (SOR ¶ 2.a). 
 
 When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted the drug use allegations, 
elaborating in part that he had used marijuana “on December 31 with a group of friends 
with whom I had [a] trusting relationship.” About his use of marijuana while he held a DOD 
security clearance, Applicant explained that he “hadn’t considered the position of trust 
granted to [him] by the DOD and its set of concomitant responsibilities.” In response to the 
Guideline E allegation, Applicant denied any intent to conceal information. 
 
 Applicant’s admission to using marijuana, including at an “event” after he had been 
granted a DOD security clearance, is accepted and incorporated as a finding of fact. After 
considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following additional findings 
of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old software systems engineer with a bachelor’s degree 
awarded in May 2010.
2
  He has worked for a defense contractor since August 2011, and 
                                                 
2 
It took Applicant five years to graduate from college. (GE 1.) According to Applicant’s father, when Applicant 
became overwhelmed, he fell behind in his studies and dropped a number of college courses “because things 
got a little bit tough.” (Tr. 70.) It is unclear when Applicant was officially a sophomore in college. Available 
residence information indicates that he moved from a dormitory at the end of the fall semester 2006 into an 
apartment in February 2007. He resided off campus at a different address from August 2007 to May 2008, 
 
 3 
has held a DOD secret clearance since January 2012. (GEs 1, 2.) Applicant is single and 
lives at home with his father and stepmother. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
Applicant was a full-time college student from September 2005 to May 2010. (GEs 
1-2.)  Applicant worked in student dining during the school year and in the gaming industry 
during summer breaks. Following his graduation, he worked part-time in the charity gaming 
industry until December 2010. He was then unemployed until August 2011, when he began 
working for his current employer. (GEs 1-2.) 
 
On August 25, 2011, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for a secret security 
clearance. Applicant responded affirmatively to question 23 inquiring into whether he had 
illegally used any controlled substance, including marijuana, in the last seven years, and he 
indicated that he used marijuana between approximately October 2005 and November 
2005 [sic]. About the frequency of his use, Applicant stated, “Minimal usage of marijuana, 
freshman and sophomore years of college, less than 10 times total. No future use 
expected either.” (GE 2.) Applicant was granted his secret clearance around January 
2012.
3
 (GE 1.) 
 
On April 16, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an e-QIP on 
which he disclosed that he had used marijuana with friends between approximately August 
2001 and December 2012. As for the frequency of his drug use, Applicant stated, “Rarely. 
Only 2-4 times in past 2 years (2 I can recall, one or maybe two that I might not). More 
frequently from 2009-2010 and approximately 2002-2003.” He added in explanation the 
following: 
 
I don’t really enjoy it, just doesn’t appeal to me. Once in a blue moon, when I 
am comfortable with people I’m with, and in a controlled, private 
environment, I have allowed myself to be cajoled. I am also cognizant that it 
has not been a criminal offense to use THC during the duration that I have 
held my Secret clearance.  (GE 1.) 
 
At his security clearance hearing, Applicant initially affirmed the accuracy of the drug 
information he detailed on his April 2013 e-QIP. (Tr. 34.) While he “almost never smoked 
marijuana,” he recalled that he used marijuana maybe a dozen times from 2002-2003 and 
then half a dozen times from 2009-2010. (Tr. 36-37.) When asked to clarify the dates of 
                                                                                                                                                             
lived with his parents that summer from May 2008 to August 2008, rented an apartment in the same locale as 
the university from August 2008 to December 2008, and went home for semester break from December 2008 
to February 2009. In March 2009, he moved into an apartment in another town and resided there through 
graduation. Applicant did not account for the one month where he lived with a friend. While there appears to 
be a break with his last move in March 2009, he would have been a junior in college by then, given his 
graduation date in May 2010. 
 
3 
The evidence does not reflect the date on which Applicant was granted his clearance. On his April 2013 e-
QIP, Applicant gave an estimated date of November 2011 as to when he was granted a secret clearance. (GE 
1.) The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana after being granted a security clearance in January 2012. 
Whether Applicant was granted his clearance in November 2011 or January 2012, he admits that he used 
marijuana in December 2012 while he possessed a security clearance.  
 
 4 
drug use from October 2005 to November 2005 listed on his August 2011 e-QIP, given the 
inconsistency with his detailed response that he used the drug during his freshman and 
sophomore years of college, Applicant testified that he meant to indicate a date of October 
2004 for his drug use. (Tr. 38.) The evidence shows that Applicant was still in high school 
in 2004. (GE 1.) When asked why he had not disclosed his marijuana use in 2009 on his 
August 2011 e-QIP, Applicant indicated that he could not recall a single instance of using 
marijuana in 2009 or 2010. Instead, he recalled his drug use as occurring during his 
sophomore year, when he stayed with friends for one month until he could move into an 
apartment. He explained his marijuana use as follows: 
 
My friend was a habitual—habitual user who always—I don’t want to say he 
was disappointed because that’s solely he liked me for who I was and we 
had a good friendship. But I guess that’s the best words. Disappointed that, 
you know, that I never smoked with him. But eventually, I gave in and I’d say 
a half a dozen times that month I—I—I smoked marijuana after realizing that 
it helped get me to sleep and that is what I believe when I was referencing 
when I said from 2009 to 2010 but that was in the winter of 2007 to 2008. I—
I understand that it seems fishy but I have to say right now I think that was—
that was a mistake in putting 2009—2009. But regardless, you’re saying why 
didn’t I put it there, well, I did, you know. I said freshman and sophomore 
years of college and that was my sophomore year of college. And so, I 
should have extended the date to compensate for that. You know, obviously, 
that 11/2005 on page 40, section 23, question 1 to 11/2005 should have 
been later, yes. My memory isn’t--isn’t--my working memory isn’t that bad. I 
can see a section where I’m writing information. Even if I was seeking to 
like—even if I was seeking to conceal information that would be the most 
lazy attempt in the history of man. (Tr. 40-42.) 
 
Applicant agreed that it would be reasonable to infer from his August 2011 e-QIP that he 
had not used marijuana since his sophomore year in college. He denied that he had used 
marijuana in 2010. When asked to confirm that he had used marijuana after his sophomore 
year, Applicant responded, “No, I—I—I can’t say that in certainty.” (Tr. 42-43.) About 
whether he was aware as of his August 2011 e-QIP that he had used marijuana after 2005, 
Applicant initially responded, “Yes that is correct.” (Tr. 43.) However, in response to 
whether he knew that he had used marijuana as recently as 2009, Applicant answered, 
“No. Oh, at the time I don’t know.” (Tr. 43-44.) Applicant later testified that he “made a 
mistake” when he indicated that he used marijuana with his roommate from 2009 to 2010. 
(Tr. 46.) 
 
 Residence information for Applicant shows that he lived in a college dormitory 
during his freshman year and the first semester of his sophomore year. In February 2007, 
he moved into off-campus housing. He moved to another town in March 2009, while he 
was still in college. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
 Based on the available information, Applicant is found to have used marijuana 
recreationally starting around August 2001, when he was in high school, including up to a 
 
 5 
dozen times from 2002 to 2003. (GE 1.) Peer pressure was a factor in his early usage. (Tr. 
23-24.) He used marijuana fewer than ten times while in college between October 2005 
and May 2010, most frequently during one month when he lived with a friend before 
moving into an apartment. (GE 1; Tr. 46.) Applicant socialized with friends who smoked 
marijuana in his presence, including times when he chose not to use the drug himself. (Tr. 
26.) The marijuana he used was provided to him free of charge. He did not purchase it or 
contribute funds toward its purchase. (Tr. 23.) In 2011 and 2012, Applicant used marijuana 
from two to four times (GE 1), after he had told the DOD that he did not intend to use 
marijuana in the future. (GE 2.) His last use of marijuana occurred on December 31, 2012. 
(GE 1.) He held a DOD secret clearance at that time, although he gave no consideration to 
the obligations of his security clearance when he used marijuana. (Tr. 27.) Applicant used 
marijuana despite his diagnosed anxiety disorder and the fact that marijuana caused him 
“unusually bad side effects, such as panic.” (Tr. 24.)  
 
 Applicant admits that “most of [his] marijuana usage was not in compliance with the 
law.” Yet, citing his state’s decriminalization of possession of minor amounts of marijuana, 
the legalization of recreational use of marijuana in some other states, his “overall lack of 
interest in using marijuana,” and his exercise of good judgment “the many, many, many 
times [he] had an opportunity to use marijuana and chose not to [use],” Applicant submits 
that his noncompliance with the drug laws should not raise significant security concern. (Tr. 
26.) Applicant denies any intent to use marijuana in the future, but when asked whether he 
could conceive of a situation where he would use marijuana, Applicant responded 
affirmatively. About the circumstance, Applicant testified that he could see himself 
“hypothetically using marijuana if [he] met a real pretty girl and [he] wanted to . . . make 
some sort of an impression. . . .” (Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant denies that he knowingly falsified his August 2011 e-QIP when he 
reported his use only in 2005 in college. His explanation is that his earlier use around 2001 
was outside the seven-year scope of the inquiry  and his marijuana use was not continuous 
or an ongoing habit. (Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 Applicant’s father, who has worked for Applicant’s employer for some 20 years and 
holds a higher-level security clearance (Tr. 53, 70), attests to Applicant being loyal to his 
friends, his family, and to our country. In his experience, Applicant has been forthright 
about his mistakes and has taken responsibility for them. (Tr. 52-54.) He has never seen 
Applicant use marijuana, although Applicant told him that he used marijuana and did not 
care for it. Applicant’s father was concerned primarily about Applicant’s use of alcohol 
when he was in college, given Applicant is on psychiatric medications for his anxiety. (Tr. 
50-51.) Applicant’s father remarked about Applicant’s need for social acceptance by his 
peers to where he believes that Applicant may at times “go along to get along.” (Tr. 51.) 
Applicant has two longtime close friends. Applicant’s father does not believe that either 
friend uses illegal drugs, including marijuana. (Tr. 66-68.) He also does not believe that 
Applicant deliberately falsified his initial security clearance application. Applicant asked him 
for advice at the time, and he told his son to tell the truth. (Tr. 62-63.) 
 
 6 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is articulated in AG ¶ 24: 
 
 7 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant used marijuana while 
socializing with friends at times between August 2001 and December 2012. He used 
marijuana due to peer pressure from 2002 to 2003 on a dozen occasions, fewer than ten 
times in college between October 2005 and May 2010, and two to four times between 2011 
and December 2012. AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance,” also applies. His use of marijuana on December 31, 2012, occurred while he 
held a DOD security clearance. It is unclear whether Applicant held his security clearance 
when he used marijuana otherwise in 2011 or 2012. Finally, AG ¶ 25(h), “expressed intent 
to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue 
drug use,” is implicated in that while Applicant denies any intent to use marijuana in the 
future, he candidly admits that he could see himself using marijuana again to impress an 
attractive woman. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is 
minimally established. There is no evidence that Applicant has used marijuana since late 
2012, and his drug use was for the most part sporadic over the years. However, the 
recurrence of his marijuana use after college, when Applicant was gainfully employed by a 
defense contractor and after he had indicated, “No future use expected,” makes it difficult 
to conclude that he is unlikely to use marijuana again, especially where he has not clearly 
and convincingly committed to no future drug involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) requires a demonstrated intent not to use any illegal drugs in the future, 
which may be shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
 8 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
Applicant testified that there were “many, many, many times” where he had the 
opportunity to use marijuana and chose not to use marijuana. He did not detail, and he was 
not asked about the circumstances. Nor did he provide information about the friends with 
whom he smoked marijuana over the years.  Applicant likely socialized in college with 
some friends and acquaintances not involved in his high school use. Concerning his more 
recent involvement in 2011-2012, he was again living with his parents and so could have 
renewed his association with old friends involved in his high school drug use. While I 
cannot speculate in this regard, Applicant has not shown that he made a concerted effort to 
avoid persons involved in illegal drug use. Even assuming that he no longer associates 
with the “habitual user” involved in his more frequent use of marijuana just prior to him 
moving into an apartment in college, Applicant’s college graduation, his return home, and 
his employment with a defense contractor did not prevent him from using marijuana in 
2011 and 2012. Applicant’s present abstinence of 2.6 years as of his security clearance 
hearing is not long enough to guarantee against relapse, particularly given his admission 
that he could conceive of circumstances conducive to him using marijuana again. 
Additionally, Applicant has not executed the statement of intent to abstain required of AG ¶ 
26(b)(4). 
 
Applicant’s father testified about Applicant’s need for social acceptance by his peers 
to where he believes that Applicant may at times “go along to get along.” Despite the 
reported adverse effects of marijuana on him, Applicant used marijuana on several 
occasions over the years in social contexts, including after he had indicated on his August 
2011 e-QIP that he did not expect to use marijuana in the future. He gave no consideration 
to his security clearance status when he used marijuana in late December 2012, but that in 
itself raises concerns about whether he can be counted on to comply with security 
requirements. He does not intend any future drug use, but the risk of relapse cannot be 
discounted based on the evidence before me. The drug involvement concerns are not fully 
mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 9 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsely certified to the accuracy of his August 2011 
e-QIP when he reported his marijuana use as fewer than ten times from October 2005 to 
November 2005 during his freshman and sophomore years in college. The reference to 
November 2005 is attributed to typographical error, given Applicant started college in 
September 2005. He would have been a sophomore during the 2006-2007 academic year. 
Yet, a reasonable inference of falsification could be drawn based on his April 2013 e-QIP 
where he reported that he used marijuana “more frequently from 2009-2010.” Given the 
seven-year scope of the drug activity question, Applicant would have been required to 
report any illegal drug use that occurred in 2009 or 2010 on his August 2011 e-QIP.  
 
 Applicant asserts that he completed his 2011 e-QIP to the best of his knowledge 
and that any discrepancies are because his memory is imperfect. (Tr. 31.) Under ¶ E3.1.14 
of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government has the burden of establishing controverted 
facts.  In this case, the Government has the burden of proving that Applicant knowingly and 
willfully misrepresented his drug use on his August 2011 e-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
established when omissions are due to misunderstanding, inadvertent mistake, or other 
cause that could negate the willful intent. That disqualifying condition provides: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, 
stating:  
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the 
omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present 
evidence to explain the omission. 
 
 Applicant is the sole source of information about his marijuana involvement, but his 
accounts have been inconsistent. In addition to the factual contradiction between the dates 
for his drug use and his detailed explanation reported on his August 2011 e-QIP, there is 
the discrepancy between the two e-QIPs about the dates of his drug use. Applicant did not 
report any drug use occurring in 2009 or 2010 on his August 2011 security clearance 
application. Applicant also did not report any marijuana use before 2005, although he was 
not required to do so. His marijuana use started around August 2001, and he used the 
drug more frequently from 2002 to 2003. At his hearing, he accurately explained that his 
use in 2001 was not within the seven-year scope of the inquiry on his August 2011 e-QIP. 
 
 10 
(Tr. 29-30.) Section 23 covering the illegal use of drugs specifically asks about any illegal 
use of a controlled substance in the last seven years. In the case of an affirmative 
response, the applicant is then asked to provide “the date(s) of use or activity, identify the 
controlled substance(s), and explain the use or activity.” It does not direct the applicant to 
provide dates for any use that occurred beyond the seven years. The April 2013 e-QIP is 
contrasted in that the applicant is specifically asked for the month and year of first use and 
the month and year of most recent use. Applicant provided the salient dates, including that 
he used marijuana more frequently from 2002 to 2003 and from 2009 to 2010. 
 
 At his hearing, he initially confirmed on cross-examination that it was accurate to 
state that he used marijuana more frequently between 2009 and 2010. Yet, when asked 
whether he also used marijuana more frequently between 2002 and 2003, Applicant 
responded that he recalled one instance where he was living with someone and another 
instance where he was friendly with persons who were frequent users. He indicated that 
the dates of 2009-2010 and 2002-2003 were accurate, but not precise. (Tr. 35.) He added 
that those two periods “stick out in [his] memory as times when [he] voluntarily used 
marijuana.” (Tr. 35-36.) Notwithstanding that testimony, when asked directly why he did not 
list his 2009 drug use on his 2011 e-QIP, Applicant responded that 2009 to 2010 made no 
sense to him in that he could not recall a single instance of using marijuana in 2009 or 
2010. When asked to explain the discrepancy, Applicant described an instance during his 
sophomore year in college where he was delayed in moving into an apartment. He resided 
for one month with a friend, whom he described as a habitual user of marijuana, and he 
used marijuana with this friend. He recalled the use as occurring in the winter of 2007 to 
2008 rather than the previously disclosed date of 2009-2010. (Tr. 40-41.)  
 
 Available residence information for Applicant shows that he moved into an 
apartment during the spring semester in 2007, which would have been during his second 
year in college. When he completed his April 2013 e-QIP, he was five or six years removed 
from any marijuana use as a college sophomore. While inaccurate recall is a possibility, 
Applicant correctly noted on both e-QIPs that he graduated from college in May 2010. It is 
difficult to believe that he would have reported in April 2013 that he used marijuana from 
2009 to 2010 if he recalled his use as occurring as a college sophomore. He would not 
have been a sophomore in 2009 or 2010. The evidence shows that he rented an apartment 
in another town starting in March 2009. Use of marijuana for a month preceding that move 
would be consistent with the 2009-2010 date disclosed on his April 2013 e-QIP, and with 
his initial validation of the 2009-2010 usage on cross-examination at his hearing. 
 
 Applicant’s August 2011 e-QIP gives the impression that he abstained from 
marijuana after his sophomore year of college through at least August 25, 2011. When 
shown that his November 2005 date for a latest use could not be reconciled with his 
admission that he used marijuana in his sophomore year of college, Applicant 
incongruously responded that he meant October 2004. On the other hand, Applicant was 
candid about his marijuana use on his April 2013 e-QIP, admitting his then relatively recent 
drug involvement on December 31, 2012. Absent any evidence that Applicant’s marijuana 
use has been more extensive than he disclosed in April 2013, his candor at that time 
weighs in his favor when determining whether he deliberately misrepresented his drug use 
 
 11 
on his first application. The evidence falls short of demonstrating that Applicant 
intentionally concealed aspects of his drug involvement when he completed his e-QIP in 
August 2011. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
4
 Applicant’s marijuana use during high school and college is only partially attributable 
to youthful indiscretion. His desire for social acceptance has made him susceptible to peer 
pressure, and he has not overcome the concerns in that regard. On December 31, 2012, 
he used marijuana while possessing a security clearance without giving any consideration 
to the obligations of a security clearance. He seems to not understand that marijuana use 
continues to be illegal under federal law and is prohibited by the DOD. The hypothetical 
circumstance under which he indicated that he could see himself using marijuana—to 
impress an attractive woman—shows that he lacks the requisite good judgment for security 
clearance eligibility. After considering all the facts and circumstances, I conclude that it is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
                                                 
4
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 12 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
