 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
 1 )  ISCR Case No. 14-07021 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 5, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2015. The 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s name was misspelled on the SOR. It has been corrected. 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
29, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 16, 2015. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. In addition, the Government submitted a copy of an exhibit list that was 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 
A through E, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held 
open until November 30, 2015, to permit Applicant to submit additional documents. He 
did not submit additional documents and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on November 24, 2015.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 The Government moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to read as follows: “You failed to 
file, as required, your federal income tax returns for at least tax years 2010, 2011, 2012, 
and 2014.”2 There was no objection and the motion was granted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in the SOR. His admission has been 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He has associate and bachelor degrees. He has not 
served in the military. He was married from 2001 to 2004. He has no children. He has 
been employed with the same company since 1990.3  
 
 Applicant admitted he failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2010 and 2011. He also testified that “there was a few years here and there I’d for 
whatever reason not filed and then I’d file a couple of years at a time and they send me 
checks and never bothered me about it. No one ever said anything about it.”4 He 
testified that for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012, he did a rough draft tax return to see if 
he would receive a refund.5 
 
Applicant testified that he was never contacted by the Internal Revenue Service. 
He does not use a tax preparer or accountant, rather he prepares the tax returns 
himself. He indicated that because he always received a refund he did not file the tax 
returns on time. He further stated that his failure to file “has no bearing on my 
trustworthiness or lack of trust thereof to—there’s no attempt to defraud anyone. 
                                                          
2 Tr. 43. 
 
3 Tr. 26-28. 
 
4 Tr. 28, 43. 
 
5 Tr. 33. 
 
 
3 
 
 
There’s no attempt to do anything that’s harmful to this country involved in this.”6 When 
asked if he realized failing to file federal income tax returns on time was a criminal 
offense, he responded, “I do now.”7 He stated he did not realize it at the time when the 
tax returns were due because he received a refund each year. When asked how is it 
that he received a refund if he did not file he stated “you just get a refund. I try to 
overpay.”8 He explained that his failure to file was “just an oversight on my part.”9 When 
asked to explain further he stated: “I just didn’t do it, ma’am. I knew I was getting money 
back and didn’t file. When the investigator told me that it was an issue, I filed.”10  
 
During his background interview with a government investigator on March 18, 
2013, Applicant indicated the reason he failed to file his federal income tax returns was 
because he thought the IRS could use the $1,000 refund that he was owed. He 
indicated during his interview that did not realize his failure to timely file his tax returns 
was a criminal offense until his facility security officer told him.11 He told the investigator 
that in the summer of 2012, he received a letter from the IRS regarding his failure to file 
his 2010 tax return, but he had not done anything. He indicated to the investigator that 
he intended to file his 2010, 2011, and 2012 federal income tax returns by April 15, 
2013. He also indicated to the investigator that the IRS did not contact him about his 
2011 tax return. Applicant’s statement about being contacted by the IRS in 2012 
contradicts his testimony that he was never contacted.12  
 
 Applicant testified that after he met with a government investigator in March 2013 
he realized he needed to file his delinquent tax returns. He stated he filed his 2010, 
2011, and 2012 federal income tax returns after April 15, 2013. He stated he had to pull 
his previous years’ bank records so he could see if he had any deductions when he 
filed. He did not have an explanation for why he failed to meet the April 15, 2013 
deadline for filing his 2012 return. He testified he filed his 2013 federal income tax 
returns on time. He stated he filed an extension for his 2014 federal income tax returns 
that expired in September 2014. He missed the extension deadline, and filed his 2014 
tax returns on November 13, 2015. Despite being aware through the SOR that the 
government had a concern about his failure to timely file his federal income tax returns, 
he admitted he did not have a valid reason for his failing to comply with the extension 
deadline.13  
                                                          
6 Tr. 19. 
 
7 Tr. 19. 
 
8 Tr. 20. 
 
9 Tr. 20. 
 
10 Tr. 21, 28-30. 
 
11 It is unknown when he learned this information from his facility security officer. 
 
12 Tr. 21-25, 33-36; GE 2. 
 
13 Tr. 29-30, 33-35. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant provided copies of IRS 1040 Forms for 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 
2014. None of the documents are signed. There is no information on the document to 
substantiate when or if they were actually filed.14 The record was held open for this 
purpose. Applicant was specifically advised about the importance of providing proof that 
the tax returns for 2010 through 2014 were actually filed and when they were filed. He 
failed to provide either.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
14 AE A through E. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following is 
potentially applicable: 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2010, 
2011, 2012, and 2014. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant was aware of his responsibility to file his federal income tax returns on 
time, yet repeatedly failed to comply with the deadline. He was advised by his facility 
security manager that failing to file federal income tax returns is a criminal offense. He 
was contacted by the IRS in the summer of 2012 about his failure to file his 2010 tax 
return. After his interview with a government investigator as part of his background 
investigation for his security clearance, he was put on notice that his failure to file his tax 
returns was a security concern. He again failed to meet the extension deadline for filing 
his 2014 federal tax return. He testified he filed it days before his hearing. Applicant’s 
behavior is recent and there is insufficient evidence to conclude that his conduct is 
unlikely to recur. Applicant’s disregard for his responsibilities cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant’s failure to timely file his tax returns was the 
result of conditions beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant was made 
aware of his legal responsibility to timely file his federal income tax returns by his facility 
security manager and the government investigator, even if he was going to receive a 
refund. Despite this information and being aware that his inaction could impact his 
eligibility to maintain a security clearance, he again failed to act responsibly. He was 
afforded an opportunity to provide documentation to show when he filed his tax returns, 
but did not. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 47 years old. Despite being made aware of the importance of 
complying with the law requiring the timely filing of his tax returns, he failed to do so. 
Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
