 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06584 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On March 11, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and she elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 15, 2015, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The 
 
2 
 
 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on October 6, 2015. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and Items 3 
through 7 are admitted into evidence. Applicant provided additional evidence that was 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and it was admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. I have 
incorporated her admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees. She has 
worked for federal contractors since 1999 and has held her current position since 2007. 
She lists one period of unemployment from June 2003 to July 2003. She has not served 
in the military. She married in 2000 and has children ages 15 and 11 years old. 
Applicant has held a security clearance in the past.1 
  
 As part of a background investigation, Applicant was interviewed in August 2007. 
She disclosed to the investigator that in the fall of 2004 she failed to pay her mortgage 
and was served foreclosure papers from the lender. She became delinquent when there 
was an interruption of her income due to maternity leave. To avoid foreclosure, the 
lender agreed to modify the loan, increase her monthly payments, and add the 
delinquent payments to the balance of the loan. Her new monthly payments were 
between $1,900 and $2,000. She indicated during her interview that she had been 
current on the loan until February 2007.2 
 
 In June 2006, Applicant’s spouse lost his job and received severance pay until 
December 2006. He received unemployment benefits of about $1,200 a month. This 
was not enough income for Applicant and her spouse to pay all of their bills. They did 
not make their mortgage payments for the months February through May 2007. They 
again applied for a loan modification. The lender approved it and again added the 
delinquent balance to their mortgage loan. Their new monthly payment was $2,118.3 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on July 27, 2012. 
She disclosed in her SCA that her husband had been unemployed for four years. Due to 
the reduction in their household income they were unable to make their mortgage 
payments and had applied for a loan modification. She indicated their financial problems 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 5. I have only considered the matters alleged in the SOR for disqualifying purposes. All other 
matters will only be considered when analyzing the applicability of the mitigating conditions and the 
“whole-person.” 
 
3 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 
started in March 2009 and were resolved in August 2010. She wrote on the SCA: 
“Resolved loan was modified. Payments and interest rate were reduced to a 
manageable amount. Payments at the new rate are being made.”4 During her October 
9, 2012 interview with a government investigator, she indicated she was unaware that 
her mortgage payments were past due and she was seeking a loan modification. SOR ¶ 
1.a ($238,169) is Applicant’s mortgage that is in foreclosure status. In Applicant’s 
response to interrogatories from March 2014, she indicated that she was updating her 
loan modification application, which included an updated budget, as required. In her 
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she is disputing the mortgage debt. Her credit 
report shows she made her last mortgage payment in January 2013. In response to the 
FORM, she stated the matter was now before a court. She did not provide any 
amplifying information as to the basis of her dispute or any documents to substantiate 
her actions to resolve the debt.5 
 
 Applicant disclosed on her SCA that she had traveled outside of the United 
States as a tourist to Haiti, Jamaica, and Mexico in September 2008. She traveled again 
as a tourist in September 2009 to Aruba and Dominica. The latter trip was taken during 
the March 2009 through August 2010 period when she indicated on her SCA that she 
was having financial problems. During her background interview on October 9, 2012, 
she provided updated information to the investigator stating she had traveled to the 
Bahamas for one to five days for tourism. No other amplifying information was provided 
regarding this information.6 
 
 Applicant disclosed in her SCA that she had a financial issue with the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). She checked “yes” to the question: “In the past seven (7) years 
you had your wages, benefits, or assets garnished or attached for any reason.” 
Applicant indicated the amount involved was $200 and stated: “IRS was attempting to 
collect on 2008 taxes, based on their estimate, prior to actual filing.” She indicated the 
issue was resolved and stated: “Resolved. Taxes were filed, and IRS system was 
updated to reflect the filing.” She listed the date the issue began as November 2011, 
and it was resolved in April 2012.7  
 
 On her SCA Applicant checked “no” to question 26, which asked if she had failed 
to file her federal, state, or local tax returns as required in the last seven years. During 
her most recent background interview in October 2012, she indicated the answer should 
have been “yes.” She disclosed that she filed extensions with the IRS and her state for 
her 2010 and 2011 tax returns. She stated that as of the date of the interview, she was 
                                                          
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Items 5, 6, 7, AE A. 
 
6 Item 4, 5. 
 
7 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
waiting for her 2009 refund. She did not explain why she was still waiting for her 2009 
tax refund in 2012.8 
 
 In response to the March 2014 specific interrogatory inquiry that asked if 
Applicant had filed her federal tax returns for 2007 through 2012, she checked “yes.” It 
also asked for explanations for failing to file on time or why they had not yet been filed. 
Applicant responded:  
 
We suffered financial losses due to medical and auto expenses that were 
unexpected. We contacted our tax preparer to inform them of our need to 
file extensions as well as work with them to get caught up on our filings. 
2009, 2010 returns are being completed now. Any refunds will be used to 
pay the tax preparer and debts owed. We plan to file 2011, 2012, & 2013 
this year (extension requests were submitted accordingly).9  
 
Applicant did not explain what specifically kept her from filing her federal and state 
income tax returns for each consecutive year. She failed to explain what action she took 
after each extension expired. Her tax transcripts reflect that she requested an extension 
to file the 2007 federal income tax return, and it was granted until October 15, 2008. On 
June 15, 2009, the IRS sent an inquiry to Applicant because the extension had expired 
and she had not filed the 2007 tax return. According to the transcript, Applicant filed her 
2007 federal income tax return on April 4, 2011. She received a refund.10  
 
 Applicant was granted an extension until October 15, 2009, to file her 2008 
federal income tax return. She did not file it until December 31, 2012. She received a 
refund. The tax transcripts she provided indicated that no tax return was filed for 2009, 
2010, 2011 and 2012.11 Applicant further stated in her interrogatory response: “Filed 
2007, 2008. Working to complete 2009 & 2010 returns now. The remaining years will be 
filed this year.”12  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR from March 2015, she stated she had filed her 
2010 tax return and was working on filing the remaining returns. She provided a letter 
from a tax professional indicating that Applicant’s 2010 tax return was filed and they 
were working on 2011 and 2009. In her response to the FORM, she stated that the 
2010 and 2011 tax returns were filed and she expected a refund. No official 
                                                          
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Item 5.  
 
10 Item 5. 
 
11 Item 5. 
 
12 Item 5. 
 
 
5 
 
 
documentation was provided to verify the current status of Applicant’s tax return filings, 
except as noted above.13  
 
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,832, filed November 2012) is for a time-share 
Applicant and her husband purchased. They were unable to make the payments due to 
unexpected expenses. In her response to interrogatories, Applicant stated she had 
contacted the creditor to address payment options for the delinquent balance. The 
creditor wanted payment in full, and she was unable to commit to paying the full amount 
due to lost wages and other financial obligations. It is unknown when she purchased the 
time-share. She stated that the time-share was not her primary residence, so she 
forfeited the property. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated “the judgment in this 
matter is being disputed.” No documentation was provided as to the basis of her dispute 
or actions taken to dispute it.14  
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement that disclosed a monthly 
mortgage payment of $2,054 and a notation that stated “modification requested.” She 
does not include this amount in her monthly expenses. She calculated a remainder of 
income after paying her expenses as $3,593, which would indicate that she had 
sufficient income to make her mortgage payment and have a remainder of $1,539. 
Applicant did not provide amplifying information about her calculations or why she has 
defaulted on her loan.15  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant attributed her financial problems to loss of 
income resulting from a government shutdown, surgical/medical expenses, and 
unexpected auto repair expenses. She also attributed her financial problems to her 
husband’s four-year unemployment. On her 2014 personal financial statement she 
listed that he was earning a salary. It is unclear when he became employed and if he 
still is employed.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
13 Items 3, 5. 
 
14 Items 3, 5, 7. 
 
15 Item 5. 
 
16 Item 5. 
 
6 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
7 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
Applicant’s mortgage is in foreclosure due to her failure to make the required 
payments since 2013. She has a judgment that was filed in 2012 that has not been 
paid. She failed to timely file her 2009 through 2013 federal and state income tax 
returns. Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy her debts. The 
above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant has not resolved the mortgage account (SOR ¶ 1.a) that is in 
foreclosure. She repeatedly had her loan modified and then was unable to make the 
payments. She admitted she failed to make her mortgage payments. She now disputes 
the debt and stated it is in the court system. She failed to provide evidence as to the 
basis of her dispute or documents to support her actions to resolve the issue. She 
admitted in her response to interrogatories that she owed the debt for the time-share 
she purchased and was unable to make the payments. She later indicated she disputed 
the judgment. She did not provide a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
judgment or provide documented proof to substantiate her dispute or evidence of her 
actions to resolve it. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has unresolved debts. She attributed her financial problems to her 
husband’s unemployment, government shutdown, medical expenses, and vehicle 
repairs. These were conditions beyond her control. Applicant did not timely file her 
federal and state income taxes from 2009 to 2013. She failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to show her failure to file was beyond her control. For the full application of AG 
¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
stated she sought a loan modification to resolve her delinquent mortgage debt, but 
failed to provide supporting documents. She did contact the time-share creditor, but 
could not meet the payment plan offered. She lists three periods when she was out of 
the country on vacation; two periods were during times when she indicated she was 
having financial problems. She failed to provide sufficient evidence that under the 
circumstances she acted responsibly to resolve the financial concerns. AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she has received financial counseling. 
She did not provide sufficient evidence that her financial problems are being resolved or 
under control. Other than statements included in her answer to the SOR, 
interrogatories, and FORM, she did not provide any documents or supporting evidence 
that she initiated good-faith efforts to repay her creditors or otherwise resolve the debts. 
She admitted she owed the debts alleged and then later disputed them without 
explanation or supporting documents. Applicant provided some evidence that she has 
sought assistance in filing her delinquent income tax returns. Some of her federal 
income tax returns are now filed, but others remain unfiled. Applicant offered no 
explanation for why she repeatedly failed to timely file the returns even after she was 
put on notice that it was a security concern. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant repeatedly neglected to timely file her federal and state income tax 
returns from 2009 to 2013, despite being aware that it was a concern. The tax 
transcripts she provided support that she has filed for some tax years, but others remain 
unfiled. She did not provide a reasonable explanation for her inaction regarding the 
timely filing of them. Applicant has had difficulty paying her mortgage for many years. 
Her conduct is recent and did not occur under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. 
Her actions cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. She has been steadily employed since 1999 except for 
a short period in 2003. She has experienced financial problems regarding paying her 
mortgage for many years. She attributed her financial problems to her husband’s 
lengthy period of unemployment, a government shutdown, medical issues, and car 
repairs. Applicant has had her mortgage loan modified more than once to allow her to 
prevent foreclosure. She purchased a time-share that she failed to pay and a judgment 
entered in 2012 is unsatisfied. She did not provide an explanation for repeatedly failing 
to timely file her federal and state income tax returns, even after she became aware it 
was a security concern. Some of them are now filed, but others remain unfiled. She has 
exhibited an unstable financial track record, which raises questions about her 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
