 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04434 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 12, 
2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 15, 2015. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified, and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. 
The record was kept open and Applicant submitted AE F through M, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 23, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
this employer as a systems administrator since 2013. She has a bachelor’s degree. She 
has no military service. She is divorced and supports three children.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling approximately $11,845 and unfiled 
federal income tax returns and unpaid federal taxes for years 2008 and 2010. The debts 
were listed in credit reports from April 2013 and June 2014, her security clearance 
application, and her subject interview in May 2013.2  
 
 Applicant admitted during her hearing testimony that her delinquent debts were 
caused by her bad financial decisions and her divorce in 2006. She described her 
divorce as “bad,” and stated she does not receive any child support from her ex-
husband. She also was unemployed for about one year from 2009 to 2010 after she 
was fired from her position because of disruptive behavior. She received unemployment 
benefits during this time. She has not received any financial counseling for her debts.3  
 
 The status of the SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (charged-off account for $3,133): 
 
 Applicant opened this credit card account in approximately 2002. She was 
making $60 monthly payments up until about 2006 when her divorce occurred. Since 
then she has not resumed payments on the account. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (charged-off account for $1,440): 
 
 Applicant obtained this personal loan account in approximately 2005 to purchase 
furniture. She was making monthly payments up until about 2006 when her divorce 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22-24, 26; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 1-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 24-25; GE 1, 4. 
 
4 Tr. at 33; GE 2-4; AE K. 
 
 
3 
 
occurred. Since then she has not resumed payments on the account. This debt is 
unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (charged-off account for $934): 
 
 Applicant opened this credit card account in approximately 2001. She was 
making payments up until about 2006 when her divorce occurred. Since then she has 
not resumed payments on the account. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.h (charged-off account for $536 and judgment for $633):7 
 
 Applicant opened this personal loan account in approximately 2008. She made 
no efforts to repay this debt and the creditor received a judgment against her (SOR ¶ 
1.h). In July 2015 she contacted the creditor to arrange a payment plan. No proof of 
payments under the plan was provided. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (collection account for $373): 
 
 Applicant opened this telecommunications account in 2012. She believed she 
paid this account, but did not any proof of payment. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (charged-off account for $186): 
 
 Applicant opened this credit card account in approximately 2002. She was 
making payments up until about 2009. Since then she has not resumed payments on 
the account. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g (lien for $2,612): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in 2013 and provided supporting documentation. This 
debt is resolved.11 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 33; GE 2-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 34; GE 2-4. 
 
7 These two allegations will be treated as one debt. ¶ 1.h is found in favor of Applicant. 
 
8 Tr. at 35; GE 2-4; AE G. 
 
9 Tr. at 35; GE 3. 
 
10 Tr. at 35; GE 2-4. 
 
11 Tr. at 35; GE 2-4; Answer. 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i (collection account for $811): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in 2013 and provided supporting documentation. This 
debt is resolved.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j (collection account for $951): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in 2013 and provided supporting documentation. This 
debt is resolved.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k (collection account for $236): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in 2015 and provided supporting documentation. This 
debt is resolved.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l (unfiled returns and unpaid taxes for years 2008 and 2010): 
 
 In Applicant’s subject interview, she admitted to failing to file her 2008 federal 
income tax return because she was going through a divorce. She failed to file her 2010 
federal tax return because she did not have the resources to pay the taxes. She filed 
her 2008 tax return in 2013 and her 2010 tax return in 2012. She entered into an 
installment agreement with the IRS in April 2015 for monthly payments of $65. She 
failed to produce documentary evidence showing she has made any installment 
payments.15 
 
 Applicant stated that she has about $200 to $300 of discretionary income at the 
end of the month after paying all current expenses. Her checking account has a typical 
balance of about $20 to $50. She has no savings or retirement accounts. All of her tax 
filings are current.16 
 
 Applicant presented letters of recommendation from her supervisor and her 
security officer. Both have worked with her since 2013. Both expressed their belief that 
she is a hardworking, mission-focused, loyal employee. They support her effort to obtain 
a security clearance.17 
 
 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 35-36; GE 2-4; AE J. 
 
13 Tr. at 36; GE 2-4; AE E; Answer. 
 
14 Tr. at 37-38; GE 2-4; AE F; Answer. 
 
15 Tr. at 27, 39-40; GE 2; AE A-D, H. 
 
16 Tr. at 41-42, 44. 
 
17 AE M. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
  
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid and she failed to 
timely file her 2008 and 2010 federal income tax returns. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. She belatedly filed her tax returns for 2008 and 
2010 and has paid four debts, but the rest remain unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant admitted that her debts were caused by her own financial 
mismanagement, her divorce, and a period of unemployment due to her firing from a 
job. Only her divorce is a condition beyond her control. She took responsible action to 
address four of her debts, but no action toward the remaining debts. She also failed to 
produce evidence that she was making payments under her tax repayment agreement. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. Applicant did not seek financial counseling. Given the 
unpaid status of the SOR debts, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Evidence of good-faith efforts to pay four debts exists, but 
evidence showing resolution of the remaining debts is lacking. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply, but ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted. However, I 
also considered that she failed to significantly resolve her financial situation. She has 
not established a meaningful track record of financial responsibility.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.g – 1.k:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.l:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
