 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04383   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s August 2013 alcohol-
related arrest is mitigated as an isolated incident that does not negatively affect his 
ongoing security worthiness. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive,1 on November 10, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the alcohol consumption guideline. DOD adjudicators 
were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel timely exercised their right to request a 
hearing in this case.2 On July 22, 2015, I issued a pre-hearing order to the parties 
regarding the exchange and submission of discovery, the filing of motions, and the 
disclosure of any witnesses.3  The parties complied with the terms of the order.4 At the 
hearing, convened on August 14, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, without objection.  After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE A and B, 
which were also admitted without objection.5  I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 
21, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 57, has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
2004 and has held a security clearance at various levels since 1978. In September 
2013, Applicant’s employer filed an incident report in the Joint Personnel Adjudication 
System (JPAS) to report an August 2013 arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI). In November 2013, Applicant’s employer updated the incident report with 
information about Applicant’s conviction on the DUI charge.6  
 
 Based at an office in State 1, Applicant often works on consulting projects away 
from home for long periods of time. In August 2013, he had been working on a project in 
State 2 for 15 months. On the night of his arrest, he consumed three to four glass of 
wine with dinner. Afterward, Applicant decided to drive himself back to the hotel, which 
was six miles from the restaurant. Less than a half mile from the hotel, a police officer 
stopped Applicant for a minor traffic violation. The police officer smelled alcohol on 
Applicant’s breath and administered field sobriety tests, which Applicant failed. The 
results of a breathalyzer test indicated that Applicant’s blood alcohol content (BAC) was 
.12%.7 
 
 Applicant self-reported the arrest to his facility security officer (FSO) the next 
business day. In September 2013, Applicant pleaded guilty to a lesser impaired driving 
charge. The court sentenced him to one year of supervised probation and ordered 
Applicant to attend 12 counseling sessions and an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting. He 
                                                          
2 Correspondence regarding the conversion of the case to a hearing is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit  (HE) I. 
 
3 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as HE II.  
 
4 The discovery letter, dated July 6, 2015 is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
5 Correspondence regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submissions are appended to the record as HE IV. 
 
6 Tr. 17-18.; GE 1, 3. 
 
7 Tr. 19, 39-43, 46-47. 
 
3 
 
was also ordered to abstain from alcohol during the term of his probation and was 
subject to random alcohol tests. Applicant completed his required substance abuse 
counseling in March 2014. He did not receive any diagnosis from the psychologist 
during his sessions and learned of the purported alcohol abuse, episodic diagnosis  
from the psychologist when he received the SOR. The court released Applicant from 
supervision in October 2014. He abstained from alcohol from the night of his arrest until 
early 2015. 8 
 
 Applicant, who describes himself as an occasional social drinker, does not 
believe that he has a problem with alcohol. However, he recognizes he committed a 
grave error in judgment the night of his arrest. Applicant does not have any other 
alcohol-related arrests on incidents. He has vowed not to consume alcohol and drive in 
the future.9 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 20-21, 33-35, 45-47; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 21, 25, 35-36. 
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it “often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”10 In August 2013, 
Applicant was arrested for and subsequently pleaded guilty to driving under the 
influence of alcohol.11 Also, Applicant admitted in response to the SOR that he received 
a diagnosis of alcohol abuse, episodic from his psychologist.12 However, the record 
does not contain medical records supporting or explaining the diagnosis. Applicant’s 
August 2013 arrest is mitigated as an isolated event that is unlikely to recur and does 
not reflect negatively on his current security worthiness.13 Despite the alcohol abuse, 
episodic diagnosis, the incident is not symptomatic of an ongoing alcohol issue. 
Applicant does not have a history of alcohol-related incidents. Nor does the incident 
reveal any concerns about Applicant’s honesty or trustworthiness. Applicant properly 
and timely self-reported the incident. This shows that he takes his duties as a clearance 
holder seriously. He also complied with the terms of his sentence which is indicative of 
his ability to follow rules and regulations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. While those granted access to classified information are held 
to a high standard of conduct, they are not held to a standard of perfection. Nor is the 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 21. 
 
11 See AG 22(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 22(d). 
 
13  See AG 23(a). 
 
 
5 
 
purpose of a security clearance adjudication to punish applicants for past misconduct. 
All that is required is that an applicant’s past is not indicative of a current inability to 
properly handle and protect classified information. Here, it is not. Applicant has held a 
security clearance for 37 years and worked in his current position for the last 11 years 
without incident. Most important, Applicant has accepted responsibility for his actions 
and expresses remorse for his conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Alcohol Consumption:  FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
