 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04864 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Syria and came to the United States in 1991. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012. Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Syria. 
Applicant has a current Syrian passport that he used for travel after becoming a U.S. 
citizen. He has about $22,000 of old delinquent debts, which remain unresolved. He 
failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign preference, foreign influence, 
and financial security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On January 7, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security 
concerns under the guidelines for foreign preference, foreign influence, and financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DoD could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him.  
 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 21, 2015, (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on June 8, 2015, and issued a Notice of 
Hearing on August 19, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 9, 2015. The 
hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered three exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without 
objection.1 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 17, 2015.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Syria. She provided web citations to 13 supporting documents to show detail and 
context for those facts (HE 1.) Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and 
Department Counsel’s request was granted. (Tr. 12.)  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004), and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in the SOR, except 
one contained in SOR ¶ 3.e. His admissions, including those made during interviews on 
February 14 and March 13, 2014, and in his answers to Interrogatories dated November 
14, 2014, are incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Answer; GE 3.)  
 
Applicant was born in Syria. He is 45 years old. He attended a Syrian university 
for two years. In 1991 he came to the United States on a student visa, and 
subsequently earned a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university. He is divorced from his 
third wife since 2006 and does not have any children. His third wife held dual citizenship 
with Syria and the United States. (Tr. 17.) He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012. 
(Tr. 18.) He has dual citizenship with the United States and Syria. (Tr. 22; GE 3.) He 
said that he is willing to renounce his Syrian citizenship and relinquish his Syrian 
passport if necessary. (GE 3.) 
 
Applicant renewed his Syrian passport in 2013, while he was visiting Turkey to 
help his parents move from Syria to Turkey. His mother subsequently died. He had a 
U.S. passport at the time of his travel there. His father subsequently returned to Syria 
                                            
1 Applicant’s three exhibits (AE A, B, and C) were not formally introduced at the beginning of his case-in-
chief, but were discussed during his testimony without objection from Department Counsel. Hence, these 
exhibits are admitted and made part of the record. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and currently resides there. (Tr. 18-19.) As a consequence of having a Syrian passport, 
he was able to remain in Turkey for six months, work, and obtain health insurance 
coverage. In June 2014 he used his Syrian passport to travel to Turkey in order to avoid 
obtaining a visa. He remained there one week. (Tr. 22.)  
 
The last time Applicant visited Syria was 2008. Between 1991 and 2008, he 
visited Syria four or five times. He used his Syrian passport. (Tr. 20.) He does not have 
any plans to visit his father in the future because he is afraid to return to Syria due to the 
violence and unrest. (Tr. 26, 30; Answer.) 
 
Applicant’s elderly father is a Syrian citizen and resident. He is a retired medical 
doctor. He maintains electronic contact with his father about twice a week. (Tr. 23-24.) 
Applicant sends his father a $1,000 each month from a real estate investment the family 
owns in the United States. The investments are held in Applicant’s and his brother’s 
names, and are worth about $1.4 million. (Tr. 25, 29.) Applicant’s brother is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and resident. Applicant’s sister, a Syrian citizen, resides in 
Turkey. Sometimes he sends her money. (Tr. 23, 25; GE 2.)  
 
In 2012 Applicant paid $5,000 to avoid military service in Syria. At the time both 
parents were living there and he was concerned that if he returned to visit them he 
would be immediately drafted into military service. (Tr. 27-28, 30.)  
 
Applicant has aunts, uncles, and cousins, who are citizens and residents of 
Syria. He speaks to one uncle weekly and three other relatives occasionally. (Tr. 28.) 
He sends an aunt $1,000 every couple months from the family’s U.S. investment 
account. (Tr. 29; AE A.)  
 
Applicant currently works for a private company. (Tr. 13-15.) He initially applied 
for a security clearance in October 2011 when he sought a position with a defense 
contractor. (Tr. 16.) He submitted a second security clearance application in January 
2014 for a different defense contractor. (GE 1, 2.)  
 
Applicant earns approximately $110,000 in his current position in private industry. 
He has about $100,000 in savings in the United States, in addition to his interest in the 
family’s investment account. (Tr. 31-32.)  
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from April 2015 and February 2014, the 
SOR alleged seven delinquent debts that totaled $25,873 and became delinquent 
between 2006 and 2008. (Tr. 43; GE 3, 4, 5.) None of the debts has been resolved, 
except the one alleged in SOR ¶ 3.e for $2,354, which he disputed and was 
subsequently deleted from his CBR.  
 
During an interview in February 2014, Applicant discussed his delinquent debts 
with a government investigator, including those listed on the SOR. He indicated that he 
was completing credit counseling with a company in order to resolve his credit issues. 
(GE 3.) He testified that he began the credit counseling before he applied for a security 
clearance in 2014. (Tr. 41.)  
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant attributed the delinquent debts to his third marriage and subsequent 
divorce, in addition to a period of unemployment from March 2013 through January 
2014, which included the time he completed the SF-86 in January 2014. (GE 3.) As part 
of his divorce settlement, he was required to pay his former wife $60,000, which caused 
him a financial strain. (Tr. 46.)  
 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance or career, or the level of responsibility his duties entail. He submitted no 
professional character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability.  
 
Syria 
 
I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning Syria, which are incorporated herein by reference. Of particular 
significance are Syria’s history concerning its authoritarian ruling regime, its being a 
state-sponsor of terrorism, and dismal record of human rights violations. Syria is 
currently experiencing significant political and violent unrest. The U.S. State Department 
has issued travel warnings to the country because of ongoing threats to U.S. citizens 
and its interests, and recommends U.S. citizens leave the country. The Syrian 
government conducts physical and electronic surveillance of its citizens and foreigners. 
The security situation in the country is extremely volatile. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern involving foreign preference: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country. 
 
 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant holds a Syrian passport that he renewed while he was a U.S. citizen. 
He used that passport to travel to Syria, after become a U.S. citizen in 2012. That 
evidence raised a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 10(a)(1) as to the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant paid $5,000 to avoid mandatory military service in Syria. There is 
no evidence that he ever served in the Syrian army or expressed a willingness to serve 
in it. Hence, no disqualifying condition was established as to the allegation contained in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. The evidence having raised one security concern under this guideline, the 
burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides five conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
  Applicant stated that he was willing to renounce his Syrian citizenship, 
establishing limited mitigation under AG ¶ 11(b). However, he continues to hold a Syrian 
passport that he renewed in 2013 after becoming a U.S. citizen. None of the other 
mitigating conditions apply to the passport allegation raised under this guideline.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 7 sets out a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Syria is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. (See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).)  
 
Syria engages in significant internal and external anti-western terrorism and 
threats of terrorism, which operate openly contrary to U.S. interests. It is known to target 
U.S. citizens. The hostile relationship of Syria with the United States places a significant 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with his father 
living in Syria does not pose a security risk. While there is no evidence that terrorists 
from Syria seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant’s father, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. Applicant 
should not be placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty 
to the United States and a desire to assist his father who resides in Syria. Accordingly, 
Applicant’s close connection to his father has generated a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a). These 
facts meet the Government’s burden of production by raising the aforementioned 
foreign influence disqualifying condition and shifting a heavy burden to Applicant to 
prove mitigation. Because his sister no longer resides in Syria, but in Turkey, which is 
not identified in this case as a country creating a heightened risk, the allegation in SOR 
¶ 2.b is found in his favor.  
  
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Those with potential application in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Considered in light of the substantial anti-Western terrorism threat and state- 
sponsored terrorist activities in Syria, Applicant did not demonstrate that it is unlikely he 
could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual and those of the United States due to family ties in Syria. He has a consistent 
and ongoing relationship with his father, who resides in Syria. He should not be placed 
in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and a desire to assist a family member, who might be coerced by terrorists or other 
entities in Syria. In addition, his communications with his father since coming to the 
United States is sufficiently frequent, such as to not be construed as casual or 
infrequent. He visited Syria at least four or five times since arriving in the United States 
in 1991, and went to Turkey in 2013 to help his parents. Accordingly, he failed to 
establish mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 8(a) or (c). 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) provides some mitigation. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He has 
lived in the United States since 1991, and became a citizen in 2012. He has some 
financial ties to the United States, including a financial interest in an investment that is 
worth about $1.4 million, and $100,000 in savings. He earned a college degree from a 
U.S. university. His brother is a U.S. citizen and resident. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant owes about $23,000 in unresolved delinquent debts that he incurred 
over the past eight or more years. He offered no persuasive evidence of attempts to 
resolve six of the seven delinquent debts. The evidence raises the above two 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant incurred substantial delinquent debts, which continue to date. He 
offered insufficient evidence from which to establish a track record of debt resolution. 
He failed to fully demonstrate that conditions beyond his control contributed to his 
financial problems, or that he acted responsibly under such circumstances. He provided 
insufficient proof that his debts are under control, or that he made a good-faith effort to 
resolve them, despite having about $100,000 in savings. Accordingly, the record is 
insufficient to establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (d). He submitted proof 
that he successfully disputed one debt for $2,354, establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) for the allegation in SOR ¶ 3.e.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent, 
articulate, and educated person, who has lived in the United States since 1991, and 
became a citizen in 2012, three years ago. He earned a college degree from a U.S. 
university. He works for a private company in the United States. He has a large financial 
interest in a U.S. investment account, and personal savings of $100,000. His brother 
lives in the United States. These are factors that weigh in favor of granting him a 
security clearance. However, the facts that weigh against granting the clearance are 
significant. He holds dual citizenship with Syria, and used his Syrian passport for travel, 
rather than his U.S. passport in 2013 and 2014, as a convenience. He has a close, 
ongoing, and understandingly loyal relationship to his elderly father, who is a citizen and 
resident of Syria. He was born in Syria and attended a university there. In addition, he 
has about $23,000 of delinquent debts, which became delinquent between 2006 and 
2008, and remain unresolved.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign preference, foreign influence, and 
financial considerations. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline C, Guideline B, and Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:                 Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:       For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 2.b:      For Applicant 
 
  11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.d:                 Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 3.e:         For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.f and 3.g:        Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
