 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05542 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s driving under the influence (DUI) conviction was an isolated alcohol-
related criminal offense. There is no other evidence of alcohol-related or criminal 
conduct. Her good service to her employer and selfless community work serves as 
evidence of her rehabilitation. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her first security clearance application (SCA) on January 2, 
2014. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline J (criminal conduct) on February 20, 2015.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 1, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 18, 
2015, and reassigned to me on September 17, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 28, 2015, scheduling a 
hearing for September 17, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted two exhibits, marked 
AE 1 and 2. AE 2 was received post-hearing. I also note that Applicant attached to her 
SOR answer 13 pages of documents related to the completion of her community service 
and probation and reference statements. Applicant’s documents and the Government’s 
exhibits were made part of the record without objections. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 25, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her response to the SOR, and at her hearing, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a complete and thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact:  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old systems engineer employed by a federal contractor. 
She entered the United States at age eight in 1982, and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1996. She attended college and received her bachelor’s degree in 
mathematics and industrial engineering in 1997. She also completed about two years of 
post-graduate studies. Applicant married in 1998, and divorced in 2003. She has a 16-
year-old son.  
 
Applicant has been working for her current employer, a federal contractor, since 
February 2011. This is her first security clearance application. Aside from the pending 
SOR allegations, there is no evidence of any other security clearance issues or 
concerns. 
 
In June 2014, Applicant was convicted of DUI and being involved in an accident 
with two pedestrians. She was sentenced to 90 days confinement (suspended), placed 
on 12-months supervised probation, fined $1,000 ($750 suspended), and ordered to 
attend a 26-week alcohol counseling program.  
 
Applicant explained that between 2011 and 2014, she was suffering from 
depression and anxiety. A number of close relatives had passed away, and she was 
having difficulty dealing with her losses. In 2010, she lost her mother; in 2011, she lost 
an uncle; in 2012, she lost her grandmother; and in 2013, she lost an aunt and her 
stepmother. Because she has a young son, Applicant always placed the priority on 
taking care of him, and she had not had the opportunity to grieve for her relatives. 
Between October 2011 and 2013, Applicant sought a physician’s help and she was 
prescribed medication for her depression and anxiety.  
 
In March 2014, Applicant met a friend for dinner and they had an emotional 
conversation. Applicant forgot that she had taken her depression and anxiety 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
medications that morning, and during the course of the dinner she consumed three 
glasses of wine. The dinner ended at around 10:30 – 11:00 p.m., and it was raining 
when Applicant started to drive home. She was upset and crying while driving. Applicant 
stopped at a red light and was distracted with her radio, working with the GPS (she did 
not know where she was), and trying to make a phone call.  
 
When the traffic light turned green, Applicant let off the brakes and allowed the 
car to move forward without paying attention to the road. She hit two pedestrians that 
were crossing the intersection and knocked them down. Applicant claimed the 
pedestrians only suffered minor bruises and scrapes, and they were able to walk after 
the incident.  
 
Applicant credibly testified that this is the first time she has been involved in 
alcohol-related or criminal misconduct. She does not consume alcohol on a frequent 
basis because she has a sister that is an alcoholic and an addict. Moreover, she is 
always concerned about setting the right example for her young son. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse and regret for her alcohol-related 
conviction. She believes that she is a responsible and conscientious parent with the 
important responsibility of raising her son. Applicant successfully completed all court-
ordered treatment, community service, and probation conditions. Because of her hard 
work, she was released from probation ahead of schedule in April 2015. Additionally, 
she attended approximately eight Alcohol Anonymous sessions. 
 
Applicant submitted a number of reference letters and presented the testimony of 
two character witnesses. She is foremost considered to be a loving and dedicated 
mother with significant parental and work responsibilities. Her long-time friends do not 
believe Applicant is a habitual alcohol drinker. They all consider Applicant’s alcohol-
related misconduct as an aberration.  
 
Applicant’s work references believe her to be a tireless, dedicated, hard-working, 
and respected professional. Her performance evaluations indicate Applicant meets or 
exceeds expectations, and makes significant contributions to her employer. Most 
impressive was Applicant’s selfless desire to help two of her neighbors during significant 
periods of time while they were recovering from cancer. Applicant unselfishly visited her 
neighbors on a daily basis caring for them and doing their chores, such as buying their 
groceries. 
  
Applicant likes her current job and believes that she is a valuable asset to her 
employer. She understands the responsibilities associated with maintaining eligibility for 
a security clearance. Applicant promised to never drink and drive in the future. Applicant 
is no longer suffering from depression and anxiety symptoms, and she is not taking any 
medications. 
 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 In June 2014, Applicant was convicted of DUI and for being involved in an 
accident involving pedestrians. Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns 
under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) 
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Both mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s DUI occurred almost two years ago. 
There is no evidence to show that Applicant had an alcohol problem before her March 
2014 DUI, or that she currently has one. On the contrary, the evidence shows Applicant 
has a reputation for consuming alcohol sparingly. She is considered to be a loving and 
dedicated mother with significant parental and work responsibilities. Applicant’s alcohol-
related misconduct appears to be an aberrational occurrence caused by unwittingly 
mixing her medications with alcohol. She is no longer consuming medications, and 
consumes alcohol sparingly.  
 
 Applicant expressed sincere remorse for her misconduct. There is no evidence of 
any additional alcohol-related misconduct or of any other issues of security concern. 
Applicant has a good employment record and an exemplary community involvement. I 
believe that Applicant’s alcohol-related misconduct happened under unusual 
circumstances, it is unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline J in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 41, has been working for her employer since 2011. Her good service to 
her employer and selfless community work serves as evidence of her rehabilitation. 
There is no evidence of Applicant having an alcohol problem before or after her 2014 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
DUI, and there is no indication of any other criminal conduct. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
pertaining to criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
