 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02029 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application.1 On February 27, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated September 20, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Influence), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 11, 2015. In a sworn 
statement, dated March 13, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On May 26, 2015, Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to 
me on June 1, 2015. A Notice of Hearing was issued on June 5, 2015, and I convened 
the hearing, as scheduled, on June 25, 2015. 
 
 During the hearing, seven Government exhibits (GE 1 through 7) were admitted 
into evidence without objection. No Applicant exhibits (AE) were offered at the time. 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 6, 2015. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He timely submitted a number of documents 
which I accepted and marked as AE A through AE T, without objection. The record 
closed on July 16, 2015. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan), appearing in 
five U.S. Government publications. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they 
are easily verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In 
this instance, the Government relied on source information regarding Pakistan in 
publications of the White House2 and the U.S. Department of State.3  
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,4 as set 
forth below under the Pakistan subsection. 
                                                          
2
 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the 
Killing of Osama bin Laden, dated May 2, 2011. 
 
3
 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2013, Chapter 5: 
Terrorist Safe Havens (Update to 7120 Report), published April 2014; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of 
Counterterrorism, Chapter 2 extracts: Country Reports: South and Central Asia Overview,  published April 2014; U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Pakistan Travel Warning, dated February 24, 2015; U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 
for 2013: Pakistan, undated. 
 
4
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
3 
                                      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted, without further commentary, all of 
the factual allegations pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor who, 
since September 2013, has been awaiting a security clearance to serve as a linguist.5 
For over a decade, Applicant has been a language instructor for a variety of employers, 
as well as a self-employed taxi driver, and he has experienced several periods of 
unemployment (June 2003 until May 2006; July 2009 until January 2010; September 
2012 until October 2012; March 2013 until at least June 2015) interspersed between 
periods of employment.6 After receiving his Pre-Medical (F.Sc.) degree in 1977, 
Applicant was awarded a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) degree 
in 1984.7 Applicant has never served in the U.S. military.8 He has never held a security 
clearance.9 Applicant was married the first time, to a native-born U.S. citizen, in 2002, 
and divorced in 2003. He married his second wife, also a native-born U.S. citizen, in 
2003, and they divorced in 2007. Despite being divorced from his second wife, 
Applicant continues to cohabit with her.10 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Pakistan,
11
 and, before their deaths, they were 
both citizens and residents of a city that is a substantial distance from the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan.
12
 Applicant’s father was, before his 
retirement, a sergeant in the British Indian Army, and his mother was a housewife.
13
 He 
has four brothers, ranging in ages 51 to 70, and five sisters, ranging in ages 50 to 64, all 
of whom are citizen-residents of Pakistan.
14
 One brother in a practicing physician, and 
                                                          
 
5
 Tr. at 73; GE 1, supra note 1, at 15; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 22, 2013), at 1.  
 
6
 Tr. at 74; GE 1, supra note 1, at 15-24. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 14; AE M (Certificate, dated September 26, 1993). 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 25. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 65; Tr. at 5. 
 
10
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 28-30; GE 2, supra note 5, at 2; Tr. at 71. 
 
11
 Under the Indian Independence Act of 1947, India was partitioned into two separate countries, India and 
Pakistan. As Applicant’s parents were both born before partition, they were actually born in India. 
 
12
 GE 5 (Relatives and Associates Chart, dated August 26, 2013), at 3. 
 
13
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 31-32 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 12, 2010), at 1. 
 
14
 GE 5, supra note 12, at 1-2. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
the other three are, or were, either self-employed or retired.
15
 Two of Applicant’s sisters 
are married, one is a widow, one is single, and one is divorced.
16
 With the exception of 
Applicant’s father’s military service, his parents and his siblings have never had any 
connection with the Pakistani Government, the military, or the intelligence service.
17
 
None of Applicant’s siblings reside near any of the disputed territories in FATA section 
of northwest Pakistan or in localities that are currently in the center of hostilities or 
terrorist activities.
18
 
 
The frequency of Applicant’s contacts with his siblings is varied. He used to 
speak with some siblings on a monthly basis, some on an annual basis, and some once 
every three years, but that frequency has been essentially reduced over time.19 Since 
he first entered the United States in 1994, Applicant traveled to Pakistan on two 
occasions: 2006 for over 30 days; and 2009 for several months when his father was ill 
and shortly before he passed away.20 He has no plans of returning to Pakistan.21 
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan.22 His primary and secondary education, as well 
as his undergraduate and graduate education occurred in Pakistan.23 Upon receiving 
his medical degree he served three six-month tours as the U.S. equivalent of an intern 
or resident in three local hospitals in Pakistan.24 He served as a medical officer with the 
Pakistani government and at a local hospital for over two years,25 and in as a medical 
officer in another country for over five years.26 Applicant immigrated to the United States 
in 1994 in order to attend a U.S. university and pursue U.S. medical licensing.27 He 
received permanent residency in 2006 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 
2011.28 Applicant maintained dual citizenship, but in November 2013 he formally 
                                                          
15
 Tr. at 33-38; GE 5, supra note 12, at 1. 
 
16
 Tr. at 38-40; GE 5, supra note 12, at 1-2. 
 
17
 Tr. at 35, 38; GE 1, supra note 1, at 33-45; GE 5, supra note 12, at 1-2. 
 
18
 Tr. at 79. 
 
19
 GE 2, supra note 5, at 2; GE 5, supra note 12, at 1-2; Tr. at 78-79. 
 
20
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 49-54; GE 2, supra note 5, at 4; Tr. at 42. 
 
21
 Tr. at 80-81. 
 
22
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
23
 AE Q (Certification, dated September 1, 1996); AE L (Character Certificate, dated November 29, 1984). 
 
24
 AE O (Certification, dated January 26, 1986); AE N (Certification, dated January 23, 1986); AE P 
(Certification, dated January 20, 1986); AE R (Certification, undated); AE T (Certification, undated); AE R 
(Certification, undated); AE S (Certification, dated November 23, 1995). 
 
25
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 25-26; GE 2, supra note 5, at 2-3; AE K (Certification, dated January 19, 1993).. 
 
26
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 26; GE 2, supra note 5, at 2-3. 
 
27
 GE 4 (Security Screening Questionnaire, dated October 3, 2013), at 1, 4. 
 
28
 GE 3 (Certificate of Naturalization, dated August 5, 2011); GE 4, supra note 27, at 5. 
 
5 
                                      
 
renounced his Pakistani citizenship and returned a number of expired Pakistani 
passports.29 Although Applicant has no financial interests in Pakistan, since 2009, he 
periodically sent two of his sisters approximately $6,000 combined to cover daily living 
expenses.30 In 2012, he sent a nephew approximately $50,000 to enable one of his 
sisters to purchase some land for his sisters’ financial security. Applicant has no control 
over the property.31 He no longer feels a sense of obligation regarding his sisters, for 
now that he has afforded them financial stability, his brothers should now be responsible 
for them.32 
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia. It is a low-income 
country, with a population that is 97 percent Muslim. After September 11, 2001, 
Pakistan reassessed its relations with the Taliban and pledged support to the United 
States and the international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom, which aimed at 
removing the Taliban from power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are 
known to be in the FATA of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which borders 
Iran and Afghanistan. Various terrorist organizations, including extremists from the 
Haqqani Network, Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistani (TTP), Lashkar I Jhangvi, Lashkar e- 
Tayyiba, and al-Qaida, operate openly in Pakistan. They are referred to as safe havens 
which are essentially ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed areas of Pakistan. 
Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists groups, al-Qaida uses this 
sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare regional and transnational 
attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and supplies. Taliban financing 
has been traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
Although they did act against TTP, Pakistani authorities did not take significant action 
against the other groups. Things changed in 2013 when one party won a majority of 
seats in the parliamentary elections. Structural reforms on counterterrorism were 
enacted, empowering the national government to address terrorism with enhanced law 
enforcement and prosecutorial powers. 
  
Various extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide attacks 
throughout Pakistan. The attacks have targeted high profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. In January 2011, the Governor of Punjab was assassinated in a 
terrorist attack, and in March 2011, the Pakistani Federal Minister for Minority Affairs 
was assassinated in another terrorist attack. Over 1,500 civilians and security forces 
personnel were killed in 2013 due to such attacks. Similar incidents occurred in 2014. 
The U.S. Department of State continues to warn U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential 
                                                          
29
 AE A (Letter, dated November 11, 2013). 
 
30
 GE 2, supra note 5, at 4; GE 4, supra note 27, at 13; Tr. at 62. 
 
31
 GE 2, supra note 5, at 4; Tr. at 60-70. 
 
32
 Tr. at 90-91. 
 
6 
                                      
 
travel to Pakistan, as the presence of several foreign and indigenous terrorist groups 
poses a potential threat to U.S. citizens throughout Pakistan. 
 
Pakistan consistently ranks among the most corrupt countries in the world by 
numerous international organizations. The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of 
the risks of traveling to Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Several American citizens 
present in Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The 
human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, human 
trafficking, “honor” crimes, sectarian violence, societal discrimination against national, 
ethnic, racial minorities, sexual identity, and caste status, as well as enforced 
disappearances, occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is 
widespread. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to the elimination of terrorist camps on 
the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and 
sustained hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified 
counterinsurgency efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in 
combating militants. The United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster 
Pakistan’s military forces and security. Since 2009, the United States has allocated 
more than $8.5 billion for Pakistani civilian and security assistance. The United States 
continues to build a long-term partnership with Pakistan, based on a belief that a stable, 
secure, prosperous, and democratic Pakistan is in the long-term U.S. national security 
interest. 
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel raided a large compound 
located in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan and shot and killed Osama bin Laden, 
the leader of al-Qaida.  
 
While most of the official U.S. commentary regarding Pakistan focuses on human 
rights violations and terrorist activities, there is little, if any, evidence that Pakistan is an 
active participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or 
violator of export-control regulations. 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
 Applicant served as a Pashto language instructor at three large military facilities 
in the United States. A common theme reflected by senior management and students is 
that Applicant is an extremely efficient, effective, well-focused, hard-working, dedicated, 
articulate, helpful, and caring individual.33 The Mountain Language Training Academy of 
the 10th Mountain Division awarded him a certificate of appreciation for his expertise 
and dedicated service.34 Applicant also served as a member of a psychiatric research 
                                                          
 
33
 AE C (Character Reference, dated August 1, 2012); AE I (Character Reference, dated August 8, 2012); 
AE J (Character Reference, dated July 10, 2012). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
team and consultant on patients in long-term care settings at a major U.S. university 
school of medicine. Two senior staff members found him to be bright, motivated, 
organized, goal-directed, pleasant, responsible, hard-working, reliable, dignified, 
responsive, and a good team member.35 Two senior staff members of another major 
U.S. university school of medicine where Applicant served as an extern in the inpatient 
psychiatry unit are equally effusive about him, noting that he is intelligent and highly 
intuitive, with good judgment, good work ethic, and a caring nature.36 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”37 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”38   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
34
 AE B (Certificate of Achievement, dated August 17, 2012). 
 
35
 AE E (Character Reference, dated October 6, 1998); AE F (Character Reference, dated September 30, 
1998. 
 
36
 AE G (Character Reference, dated November 24, 2004); AE H (Character Reference, dated November 
19, 2004). 
37
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
38
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”39 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.40  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”41 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”42 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
                                                          
39
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
40
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
41
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
42
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.43 Applicant’s relationships with his siblings who 
remain Pakistani citizens and residents are current security concerns for the 
Government.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. 
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his siblings who are Pakistani 
citizen-residents, to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of 
interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
                                                          
43
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
10 
                                      
 
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or communication with foreign citizens 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.44 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”45 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in 
Afghanistan, forcing the Taliban out of power. Nevertheless, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within both Afghanistan and Pakistan. It is less likely that 
the Pakistan government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive information. 
The real concern in this instance is not the Pakistan government, but rather al-Qaida or 
other terrorist organizations operating within Pakistan.  
 
Applicant’s siblings are citizens and residents of Pakistan, residing in locations 
that are substantial distances from both the FATA of Pakistan and Balochistan 
Province. There is substantial risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a 
security clearance. There is no evidence that Applicant’s siblings are, or ever have 
been, political activists, challenging the policies of the Pakistan government; that 
                                                          
44
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
45
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
11 
                                      
 
terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or his siblings for any reason; that 
the Pakistan government, al-Qaida, or other terrorist organizations have approached 
Applicant; or that his siblings currently engage in activities that would bring attention to 
themselves. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would be targets for 
coercion or exploitation by the Pakistan government, al-Qaida, or other terrorists, which 
may seek to quiet those who speak out against them. 
 
Applicant relocated from Pakistan to the United States in 1994 and has resided in 
the United States since that time; he married twice here; and he worked here. He 
formally renounced his Pakistani citizenship. With the exception of his siblings residing 
in Pakistan, Applicant’s immediate family member, his ex-wife/current cohabitant 
resides in the United States. Moreover, he wants his security clearance so that he can 
return to his linguist/language instructor position to assist U.S. Armed Forces. He has 
offered to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in Pakistan, and has shown his 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.  
 
Applicant’s continuing relationship with his siblings is relatively close and his 
contacts with them are sometimes frequent and sometimes infrequent, but generally too 
close and frequent to generate more than a limited application of AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). 
However, I am persuaded that his loyalty to the United States, as well as his loyalty to 
his medical profession, is steadfast and undivided, and that he has “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [he] can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.46       
                                                          
46
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
12 
                                      
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because his 
siblings are citizens and residents of Pakistan. Although they reside in locations that are 
a substantial distance from both the FATA of Pakistan and Balochistan Province, there 
is substantial risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion from al-Qaida, or other terrorist organizations, but 
not necessarily from the Pakistan government.  (See AG & 2(a)(8).)   
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has offered to risk his life to support the United States’ goals, and has shown 
his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. He is fully aware of the risks to 
himself and family members from al-Qaida and other terrorists. These circumstances 
increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a 
foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him.47 With 
Applicant’s substantial withdrawal from his continuing relationships with his siblings 
residing in Pakistan, especially since he has furnished a financial security for two of his 
sisters, there is a reduced “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
While the current environment regarding terrorism in Pakistan is difficult, it differs 
only in degree from other democracies throughout the world. Terrorists are relatively 
active in France, Belgium, the United Kingdom, and even in the United States. Some 
countries have started to confront the problem, while others are either unwilling or 
unable to do so. Pakistan is one of those countries that has finally awakened to the 
threat after years of being unable to effectively do so. Under the evidence presented, I 
have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
   
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
47
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
13 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
