1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-05011
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. His background includes multiple alcohol-
related incidents during 2001–2010 when he was arrested and charged with drunk
driving. His most recent arrest was in 2010, which resulted in a diagnosis of alcohol
dependence as well as his honorable discharge from military service due to alcohol
rehabilitation failure. Since then, he has abstained from alcohol for periods and he has
reduced his level of drinking, but he continues to drink alcohol on a periodic basis. He
did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security
concern stemming from his history of excessive consumption of alcohol. Accordingly,
this case is decided against Applicant.
 Exhibit 1 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,2
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate3
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
 Exhibit B. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (Standard Form 86) on May 12, 2014.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
(DOD), on February 4, 2015, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint.  It2 3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline G
for alcohol consumption. He answered the SOR on February 19, 2015, admitted the
SOR allegations, and requested a hearing.  
The case was assigned to me on July 8, 2015. The hearing was held as
scheduled on July 28, 2015. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1–3, and they were
admitted. Applicant offered Exhibits A and B, and they were admitted. Applicant
testified, but no other witnesses were called. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received
on August 6, 2015.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is seeking to
obtain a security clearance for his job as a data link analyst. He has worked for his
current employer since May 2014, although he has recently been in a part-time, on-call
capacity pending the outcome of this case. 
Applicant’s employment history includes active duty military service during
1996–2010, which included nine years of sea service.  He was discharged in October4
2010 on the basis of alcohol rehabilitation failure, although the character of his service
was deemed honorable. He was then unemployed until 2014 when he began his current
job. While unemployed, he spent the majority of his time living with and assisting his
grandparents, and he began an associate’s program in computer information systems in
2012. He has never married and has no children. 
 Tr. 46. 5
 Tr. 35.6
 Exhibit A. 7
 Tr. 27. 8
 Tr. 34. 9
 Tr. 28. 10
 Tr. 28. 11
 Tr. 28–29. 12
 Tr. 29–30. 13
3
Applicant has a history of excessive consumption of alcohol, and it includes the
following facts and circumstances: (1) in 2001, he was arrested twice in the same week
for driving while intoxicated (DWI) and reckless driving,  the cases were combined or5
disposed of together resulting in a conviction for DWI, a suspended sentence to five
months of jail, a fine, and suspension of his driver’s license; (2) due to his 2001 arrests,
the military required him to undergo alcohol counseling for two weeks; (3) in 2005, he
was arrested and charged with two counts of driving under the influence of alcohol
(DUI), which resulted in a conviction and sentence to 48 hours of jail, 90 days on the
DUI first-offender program, 90 days of license restriction, a fine, and probation for 36
months; (4) due to his 2005 arrest, the military required him to undergo a month-long
inpatient treatment program, and the military also imposed nonjudicial punishment
against him; (5) in 2010, he was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle under
the influence of alcohol based on a blood-alcohol level of .10,  but the charge was6
subsequently dismissed; and (6) due to his 2010 arrest, the military required him to
undergo a five-week treatment program during which he received a diagnosis of alcohol
dependence, in remission,  and the military also imposed nonjudicial punishment7
against him. 
Applicant continues to drink alcohol, although nowhere near the level of
consumption when he was in the military. He stated that his drinking habits in the
military consisted of drinking three to four nights per week and having four to five drinks
per occasion.  He believes he received a diagnosis of alcohol dependence when going8
through treatment in 2005,  but there is no documentation supporting that fact. He9
stated that he reduced his drinking by 75% or so since leaving the military.  He stated10
that he has been intoxicated (meaning well beyond the legal limit for operating a
vehicle) twice since leaving the military, a circumstance he credits to living with his
grandparents.  He typically has one to two drinks (rum-and-Cokes) per month.  When11 12
he drinks, he does so at home or at a friend’s house after turning over his car keys to
his friend.  He denies drinking to the point of blacking out or vomiting since leaving the13
 Tr. 30. 14
 Tr. 30. 15
 Tr. 37–39. 16
 Tr. 39–40. 17
 Tr. 40–42, 50–51. 18
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to19
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.20
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 22
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.24
4
military.  He was last drunk on Halloween 2014.  He was required to undergo a state-14 15
ordered treatment or counseling program in 2011 to obtain a driver’s license,  which he16
recently renewed. He has not attended a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
program since 2011, as he believes he has as adequate support system in place.  He17
considers himself an alcoholic, but he also believes he is able to control his use of
alcohol in a responsible way.18
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As19
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt20
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An21
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  22
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting23
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An24
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.26
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 27
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).28
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.29
 AG ¶¶ 21, 22, and 23 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).30
5
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate25
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  26
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s27
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.28
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. The
Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those
persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it29
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
In analyzing this case under Guideline G for alcohol consumption,  I have30
considered the following disqualifying and mitigating conditions:
AG ¶ 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace,
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the [person] is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
AG ¶ 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 AG ¶ 23(b).31
6
AG ¶ 22(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g.,
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence; 
AG ¶ 22(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized
treatment program; 
AG  ¶ 22(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent,
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the [person’s] current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Applicant has a serious problem with alcohol. This is rather obvious in light of the
following facts and circumstances: (1) the multiple incidents of drinking-and-driving that
resulted in arrests, charges, and convictions during 2001–2010; (2) the additional
adverse consequences (nonjudicial punishment) he suffered; (3) the two-week alcohol
counseling program in 2001, the month-long inpatient program in 2005, and the five-
week alcohol treatment program in 2010, which included receiving a diagnosis of
alcohol dependence; (4) his premature discharge from military service after nearly 14
years of active duty due to alcohol rehabilitation failure; and (5) his continued use of
alcohol after the treatment programs as well as after receiving a diagnosis of alcohol
dependence.  
Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence of reform and rehabilitation to
persuade me that his history of heavy drinking, as well as drinking-and-driving, is safely
in the past and will not recur. On this point, it is telling that Applicant continues drinking
after going through two intensive alcohol-treatment programs, which included at least
one diagnosis of alcohol dependence. He now reports that he has modified his drinking
habits, has substantially reduced his level of consumption, and no longer operates a
motor vehicle after drinking. Those are all positive signs. But what is missing here is: (1)
a recent alcohol evaluation with a diagnosis and a favorable prognosis; or (2) an
established track record of abstinence, which is particularly significant given that he
received a diagnosis of alcohol dependence as opposed to alcohol abuse; or (3) both.
Indeed, one of the mitigating conditions makes a clear distinction between dependence
and abuse, noting that the former requires an established pattern of abstinence while
the latter only requires responsible use.  Although he reports that he is consuming31
alcohol at a moderate and responsible level, the fact that he continues to drink means
he is only a step or two away from another incident of drinking-and-driving or some
other adverse alcohol-related incident. Taken together, those circumstances militate
against a favorable decision.
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).32
7
In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if
the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave
due consideration to the whole-person concept.  I am convinced that Applicant accepts32
responsibility for his actions, but I am not convinced that the risk of recurrence of
another alcohol-related incident is acceptably low. Accordingly, I conclude that he did
not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility is
denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
