 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-06128   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 10, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. As listed in the 
SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on nine debts in the total amount of 
$34,622. One delinquency was forgiven by the creditor; he is making payments on four 
accounts; and he has formally disputed the remaining four accounts. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 6, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 16, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
17, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 3, 2015. The case was rescheduled 
due to unavailability of a court reporter. An amended notice of hearing was issued 
September 8, 2015, rescheduling the hearing for September 30, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled via video teleconference between Woodland Hills, California 
and Honolulu, Hawaii. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through AE L, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant and three witnesses testified. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 10, 2015. The record was left open for 
Applicant to submit additional exhibits. Applicant presented additional exhibits marked 
AE M through AE T. Department Counsel had no objections to AE M through AE T and 
they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He has been employed with his current employer, a 
Government contractor, since August 2012. He is divorced from his first wife and 
engaged to marry a second woman. He and his fiancée are expecting their first child 
together. (GE 1; AE B; Tr. 33.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owes approximately $34,622 on nine delinquent 
financial obligations. In his Answer, Applicant denied SOR allegations 1.a through 1.i. 
However, his debts are documented in the record credit reports dated August 24, 2012; 
October 29, 2014; February 3, 2015; and July 8, 2015. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to a 2010 divorce, several periods of 
unemployment, and the unexpected medical problems of his fiancée’s daughter. He 
was unemployed from September 2008 through December 2008 and March through 
October 2011. Applicant’s fiancée’s daughter suffered a medical condition that required 
expensive, out-of-state treatment in 2014. He testified that he now has enough income 
to satisfy his expenses and repay his debts. He enlisted the help of a debt management 
company and will continue to resolve his debts through his debt management plan until 
all of his valid delinquencies are resolved. He has completed financial counseling and 
his household utilizes a budget for expenses. (GE 1; AE B; AE E; AE F; AE G; Tr. 30, 
63-65.) 
 
 Applicant contacted a debt management company in April 2015. They created a 
plan for Applicant to pay $594 per month to the debt management company. The debt 
management company then negotiated payment agreements with each of Applicant’s 
creditors. From June through September, Applicant successfully made his monthly 
payments under this plan. In October 2015, Applicant revised the debt management 
 
 
3 
 
 
plan to include additional debts, which he had previously contested. He now pays $721 
monthly to the debt management plan. He intends to continue making his monthly 
payments to the debt management company until all of his delinquencies are resolved. 
His budget allows him to make this higher payment and still have a monthly remainder. 
(AE C; AE E; AE F; AE G; AE T; Tr. 44.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to be indebted on a delinquent auto loan in 
the amount of $9,579. This debt is enrolled in Applicant’s debt management plan. 
Payments of $191 per month are sent to this creditor out of Applicant’s debt 
management plan account. This debt is being resolved. (AE D; AE F; AE T; Tr. 43.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted on a delinquent account in the 
amount of $8,522. This debt was a credit card in the name of Applicant’s father. 
Applicant’s father listed Applicant as an authorized user on the account, but Applicant 
was not the responsible party. Applicant’s father discharged this debt through 
bankruptcy. Applicant contacted the creditor and was told the debt was discharged. 
Following the advice of the creditor, he contacted the credit reporting agencies in writing 
and disputed this debt. He presented a copy of the dispute he filed. (AE D; GE 6; AE F; 
AE Q; AE R; AE I; AE L; Tr. 46-48, 58-60.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c to be indebted on a delinquent account in the 
amount of $7,210. This debt is enrolled in Applicant’s debt management plan. Payments 
of $183 per month are sent to this creditor out of Applicant’s debt management plan 
account. This debt is being resolved. (AE D; AE T; Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d to be indebted on a delinquent credit card 
account in the amount of $6,243. This debt was enrolled in Applicant’s debt 
management plan. However, the creditor recently issued Applicant a 1099-C 
Cancellation of Debt on this account. As a result, it has been removed from his debt 
management plan. This debt is resolved. (AE D; AE F; AE T; Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e to be indebted on a delinquent account in the 
amount of $1,218. This debt is enrolled in Applicant’s debt management plan. Payments 
of $31 per month are sent to this creditor out of Applicant’s debt management plan 
account. This debt is being resolved. (AE D; AE T; Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f to be indebted on a delinquent account in the 
amount of $115. This debt was associated with a rental property Applicant previously 
lived in. He contacted the property management group and was told they did not have 
any record of the debt. Applicant filed a written dispute of the debt with the credit 
reporting agencies. He is willing to repay this debt but the creditor told him he owes 
nothing. (Tr. 50, 55.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g to be indebted on a delinquent account in the 
amount of $1,121. Applicant disputer this debt with the crediting reporting agencies after 
 
 
4 
 
 
he contacted the creditor and was told they have no record of a delinquency. (Tr. 51, 
55-56.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h to be indebted on a delinquent credit card 
account in the amount of $304. Applicant disputed this debt with the crediting reporting 
agencies after he contacted the creditor and was told they have no record of a 
delinquency. (Tr. 51-52, 56.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i to be indebted on a delinquent account in the 
amount of $310. This debt is enrolled in Applicant’s debt management plan. Payments 
of $27 per month are sent to this creditor. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 52, 58.) 
 
 Applicant’s administrative lead and team lead testified on his behalf. They are 
aware of Applicant’s financial issues. Applicant’s team lead speaks highly of Applicant’s 
skills and has no questions about Applicant’s trustworthiness or honesty. Applicant also 
presented letters of recommendation from friends and co-workers, who attest to 
Applicant’s integrity and work ethic. Applicant has been awarded numerous certificates 
of achievement and professional training. (AE A; AE H; AE K; Tr. 35-40.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated nine debts in the total amount of $34,622. These debts 
establish both a history of delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy his 
obligations. The evidence raises security concerns under the above conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following provide 
mitigation: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose out of his divorce, unemployment, and 
treatment of his fiancée’s daughter’s illness. He addressed all of his delinquent debts 
either through his debt management plan or through a formal dispute after initiating 
contact with the creditor to arrange repayment in a responsible, albeit recent, manner. 
He is making payments on four of the SOR alleged debts, ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.i. He 
listed his debt in ¶ 1.d with the debt management firm, but it was fully forgiven by the 
creditor. He formally contested the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. He has 
shown a recent track record of making consistent payments through his debt 
management plan since April 2015. He can be trusted to continue to make his monthly 
payments on his remaining delinquencies. He is willing to make payments on the 
disputed debts if he is found to owe them after the disputes are resolved. He has 
received financial counseling and created a budget. His financial delinquencies are 
under control and he is making a good-faith effort to repay his creditors, who are willing 
to accept payments. Applicant’s indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security concerns with respect to his 
financial delinquencies are mitigated. The above conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is highly regarded by 
his coworkers and colleagues. His financial problems arose out of circumstances that 
he could not control. His recent efforts to address his debts show that he now utilizes 
sound financial practices, learned through financial counseling. He is unlikely to incur 
delinquent accounts in the future. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt 
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
