KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The cited portion of the interview summary from Applicant investigation merely
represents a recitation of Applicant’s responses during the interview, not the interviewers
opinions.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-06406.a1
DATE: 12/04/2015
DATE: December 4, 2015
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-06406
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
(Deleted), Personal Representative
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On
February 3, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 15, 2015, after the hearing, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant served in the U.S. military from
the 1980s to the early 1990s.   He was charged by the military in 1992 with committing fraud
because he applied for and was receiving housing and other allowances that he was not entitled to
receive.  Specifically, Applicant applied for and received allowances for military members with a
dependant(s).  Although he was married to his first wife, they had been separated for years and he
was not providing her financial support. Long after Applicant and his first wife permanently
separated, he submitted at least two forms to the military claiming that he and his former wife were
living together in order to receive the higher-rate allowances.  When interviewed by military
investigators, Applicant was specifically advised that he was suspected of committing fraud against
the U.S. Government, in violation of Article 132, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ).  After
waiving his right to counsel and to remain silent, Applicant told the investigators that he was unable
to afford to get a divorce from his former wife because of financial problems.  He went on to state,
“Unfortunately, I did not realize until now the seriousness of my actions, therefore I am willing to
take full responsibility for my actions.”
Applicant went to a preliminary hearing on the UCMJ charges, where he was represented
by a military defense counsel.  Subsequently, he submitted a request for discharge in lieu of trial by
court-martial.  His request was granted and he received an under other than honorable conditions
discharge (UOTHC).  His federal income tax returns were intercepted to recoup the $8,500 in
allowances he illegally received.
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 2014.  He stated therein that
he has received a UOTHC discharge for dating his current wife while she was still married to her
first husband and charges were brought against him by that former husband.  Applicant was
subsequently interviewed by a security clearance background investigator.  Applicant told the
investigator that he was investigated and discharged from the military for adultery.  At his hearing,
he admitted that he was investigated and discharged from the military for committing fraud, not for
adultery.  He also testified that the reason he listed adultery as the reason for his discharge on his
SCA was because he did not remember the correct information.  
Applicant purchased furniture on credit and was not required to pay for it for the initial 18
months.  After the 18-month grace period ended, he did not make any of the required payments.  In
2008 the creditor secured a judgment against him in the amount of $7,500.  He purportedly entered
3
into a repayment plan with the creditor, but stopped paying after about six months.  He did not
submit evidence of the plan or the payments.  Applicant has not contacted the creditor to resolve the
debt.  He stated that his financial problems were due to layoffs, unsteady employment and
underemployment.  He submitted no evidence of financial or debt counseling, or a written budget.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Regarding Guideline F, the outstanding debt
is not an isolated incident.  Instead, it is symptomatic of a longstanding history of financial problems
dating back to the mid-1980s.  Applicant has yet to take any discernible action, to include financial
counseling, to change the trajectory of his financial situation.  It appears likely that his poor financial
situation, as well as the attendant security concerns, will continue into the foreseeable future.
Regarding Guideline E, Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA when he failed to disclose
the true reason for his UOTHC discharge.  Applicant’s explanation for not listing fraud on his SCA
as the reason for his UOTHC is implausible and not credible.  Moreover, Applicant’s attempt to
mislead the Government regarding the basis for this UOTHC discharge did not end with the
submission of his SCA.  Instead, he repeated the lie that he was discharged for adultery to the
background investigator.  None of the mitigating conditions apply.  Applicant’s falsification of his
SCA is recent and was part of an ever escalating plan to mislead the Government regarding his past.
It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information.
Applicant argues that the Judge did not take all provided information into account when he
made his final decision.  In a fashion similar to his assertion at the hearing, he argues evidence and
facts that he believes establish that he did not defraud the Government while in the Air Force and
he did not subsequently attempt to deceive the Government about his past during his security
clearance application process.  Lastly, Applicant stresses, by way of mitigation, that his actions
while in the Air Force occurred over twenty-four years ago.  Applicant has not established error on
the part of the Judge.
Applicant’s brief includes matters not contained in the record, which we cannot consider.
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant’s citation to several items of evidence that he argues support his
position is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence in the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-08412 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep.11, 2015).  To the extent that he is
challenging the Judge’s findings of fact, we conclude that the findings are based on substantial
evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the evidence.  Neither do his arguments
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06438 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2009).  Moreover,
Applicant has cited to no error likely to change the outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).   
Applicant cites to a portion of the interview summary for the proposition that he is
financially stable and not subject to blackmail.  These comments represent Applicant’s responses
to questions asked of him during the interview.  They are not the interviewer’s opinion of the state
4
of Applicant’s finances or Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03069
at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2015).
 
The Judge’s resolution of conflicting evidence relating to the Guideline E falsification
allegation rests, in substantial part, on his negative assessment of Applicant’s credibility.  After a
review of the entire record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s credibility assessment is reasonably
supported by the evidence.    
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed; Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
