KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Appplicant had one attorney representing him at the hearing.  One of his witnesses was
an attorney but that attorney did not represent Applicant at the hearing.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04202.a1
DATE: 12/24/2015
DATE: December 24, 2015
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04202
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 8, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a hearing.
On September 30, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant worked as an employee of a company from 2002 to 2005.  For those tax years he
filed and paid his taxes in a timely manner.  In 2006, he established his own company and became
an independent consultant, a job he has performed for various Federal contractors since.  Except for
two four-month periods of unemployment he has worked steadily since 2002.  He has held a security
clearance for about 33 years without incident of concern.  His yearly earnings rose from $120,000
in 2005 to about $250,000 at the present.  
Applicant did not file his Federal or state income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2012.
He eventually filed them in 2012.  In addition, he did not pay his Federal or state taxes for tax years
2006 through 2012.  He disclosed these failures in his security clearance application (SCA),
attributing his delinquencies to lack of funds.  
Applicant was discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1994 and in Chapter 13 bankruptcy in
2002.  He stated that he had experienced unemployment, a marital separation, and expenses due to
his father-in-law’s funeral.  In 2012 the IRS filed a lien against Applicant for $93,000 and two liens
in 2013 for about $120,000.  He owed his state about $2,700 in back taxes as well.  
Applicant supplied a number of reasons for his failure to have filed and paid his taxes.  He
had set up a restaurant that depleted his savings, he acquired extra expenses during his separation
from his first wife, his children had medical problems and he had no insurance, his in-laws lived
with him, and he paid his father-in-law’s medical and burial expenses.  He also noted his periods
of unemployment.
From 1996 on, Applicant made several purchases.  He bought two time-shares, a boat and
trailer, a 55-acre farm in another state, and three automobiles.  He bought the farm as a retirement
and investment property, intending to sell the gas rights in exchange for substantial royalties.
However, political events intervened to make this not possible. 
In 2010, Applicant began paying his taxes.  The next year, the IRS undertook its collection
efforts, and Applicant hired an attorney to assist him in resolving his tax problems.  He established
a payment plan, after which the IRS suspended its garnishment actions.  Applicant also established
3
a payment plan with his state taxing authorities and is making payments on it.  Applicant intends to
sell some of his property to enable him to pay off his tax debt.
Applicant expressed remorse for his tax problems and admitted that he had not managed his
finances properly.  He testified that his knowledge and expertise make him a valuable asset, and his
current employer supports his effort to remain eligible for a clearance.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved some of the SOR allegations in Applicant’s favor.  However, he entered
adverse findings regarding Applicant’s tax deficiencies.  The Judge characterized them as ongoing
and that the circumstances under which they were acquired continue to cast doubt upon Applicant’s
judgment and reliability.  He noted that Applicant’s problems had been affected by circumstances
outside his control, such as a divorce and unemployment.  He also noted that Applicant has earned
a substantial salary for the past several years.  He also stated that Applicant’s having lacked medical
insurance was due to his own decision.  The Judge found Applicant’s testimony that he had not been
aware of the tax laws with which he was expected to comply to be lacking in credibility.  Applicant
had filed timely returns until 2007, evidencing an understanding of his responsibility to comply with
the law.  He also spent funds on various purchases, such as a boat, several cars, and a farm, that
could have been directed toward paying his taxes.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s recent
efforts at resolving his tax problems are not enough to mitigate concerns about his judgment and
reliability. 
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge did not consider the testimony of his tax attorney concerning
his plan to resolve his tax delinquencies.  He states that the Judge did not mention this witness’s
name as having made an appearance on Applicant’s behalf.  Applicant argues that this is “a major
flaw” in the Decision, insofar as this witness provided most of the facts about his repayment plan.
Appeal Brief at 1.  Applicant cites to other evidence, such as the circumstances underlying his debts,
his various efforts at addressing them, his having held a clearance for many years, and the quality
of his job performance in contending that the Judge’s decision was erroneous.
Applicant was represented at the hearing by an attorney, whose name appears under the
heading “Appearances” on the first page of the Decision.  She identified herself at the beginning of
the hearing, stating “I’m representing the Applicant.”  Tr. at 6.  The tax attorney did not represent
Applicant.  Rather, he served as a witness.  Applicant’s attorney called him, stating “I would like
to call my first witness[.]” Tr. at 25.  This person did not make an appearance in the sense of
providing representation and, therefore, was not listed as if he had.  The Judge accepted the tax
attorney as an expert witness, permitted him a wide latitude in testifying, and asked questions of him
after Applicant’s attorney had finished direct examination.  Moreover, the Judge made findings
about Applicant’s repayment plan that appear to have been based, in large measure, upon the
testimony of this witness.  
4
Concerning the other evidence that Applicant has cited, the Judge made findings about it also
and discussed the evidence in the Analysis portion of the Decision.  Applicant’s good prior security
record is a matter that the Judge was required to consider, along with all the other evidence in the
record.  However, even those with good prior records can encounter circumstances in which their
judgment and reliability might be compromised.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04648 at 3 (App. Bd.
Sep. 9, 2015);  Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D. C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied 397 U.S. 1039
(1970).  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-08412 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).  Applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge
weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05251 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015).  Applicant challenges the
Judge’s whole-person analysis.  We conclude that the Judge satisfied the requirements of the
Directive in that he considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct and circumstances.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-02806 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015).  Applicant cites to the effect that a clearance
denial will have on him and those who rely on him.  The Directive does not permit us to consider
the impact of an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13180 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 21,
2013).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
