 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05369 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the 
alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and G (alcohol consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 2, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
21, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 17, 2015. The hearing was convened 
 
2 
 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
U.S. military from 2003 until he was honorably discharged in 2011. He deployed to 
Afghanistan in 2005, Iraq in 2008 to 2009, and Afghanistan in 2009 to 2010. He is a 
high school graduate. He has never married, and he has no children.1 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2007 and charged with public intoxication. He was 
given 80 hours of community service, and the charge was dismissed. He received a 
letter of counseling from his commanding officer.2 
 
 In 2008, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) under Article 15 of the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for violating Article 134 by being drunk and 
disorderly. He was ordered to perform extra duties for 14 days, and he forfeited $200 in 
pay. He was also required to attend a one-day Alcohol Drug Abuse Prevention and 
Treatment (ADAPT) program.3 
 
 In 2012, Applicant had a few beers before he reported to work at about 3:00 a.m. 
His supervisor severely chastised him, or as described by Applicant: “I got a good 
yelling.” Applicant was permitted to work that day, and there was no formal disciplinary 
action taken.4 
 
 Applicant describes his current alcohol consumption as three or four beers a 
month. He stated that he works in a harsh environment and that alcohol is not 
conducive to his work.5 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
April 2013. He reported his 2008 NJP for drunk and disorderly. He did not report his 
2007 arrest for public intoxication. He was not required to report the scolding he 
received from his supervisor. He credibly testified that he did not intend to falsify the SF 
86. He did not think he was required to list the 2007 arrest because he did not think he 
had been charged.6 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 13-14; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 14, 18-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
4 Tr. at 15-17; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
5 Tr. at 17-18, 20-21. 
6 Tr. at 12-15; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 The above disqualifying conditions are established by Applicant’s alcohol-related 
incidents.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident was more than three years ago. He has 
matured and currently only drinks about three or four beers a month. I find that 
Applicant has established a pattern of responsible alcohol use and that uncontrolled 
 
5 
 
drinking is unlikely to recur. His current alcohol consumption does not cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) are applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and G in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
honorable military service and his multiple deployments to Afghanistan and Iraq. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the alcohol consumption security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
