 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-02454 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel  
Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns regarding his foreign familial 
connections to the Republic of Korea (South Korea). Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On July 31, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns under the 
foreign preference and foreign influence guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested an administrative determination on the record. With his Answer, Applicant 
submitted a letter from his employer, noting that Applicant turned in his foreign passport 
to the Facility Security Officer (FSO). 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of relevant material (FORM). 
Apparently, after receiving the FORM, Applicant requested a hearing. His request was 
not communicated to the hearing office and another administrative judge issued a 
decision. Said decision was subsequently rescinded, and the case was assigned to me 
for hearing. At the parties’ request, I have not considered the contents of the FORM or 
the prior decision issued by the other administrative judge. However, in case of 
appellate review, the FORM and the decision have been included in the case file. See 
Transcript (Tr.) at 17-21; Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I. 
 
 Applicant’s hearing was convened on July 23, 2015.2 Department Counsel 
moved to amend the SOR to withdraw the foreign preference security concern. Without 
objection, I granted the motion. Tr. at 22-23.  
 
 Department Counsel offered exhibit (Ex.) 1, Applicant’s security clearance 
application, and Ex. 2, a request for administrative notice. The request is a four-page 
document, listing proposed facts about South Korea that Department Counsel seeks for 
administrative notice. Both exhibits were admitted without objection at hearing. 
However, as Applicant had only quickly read through the source documents cited by 
Department Counsel in support of the proposed facts for administrative notice, I 
provided Applicant additional time post-hearing to review the documents, raise any 
objections, and provide any additional matters for my consideration. Tr. at 27-34.3 
 
 Applicant testified and offered Ex. A – D.4 After the hearing, he timely submitted 
Ex. E – G. All exhibits were admitted without objection. The hearing transcript was 
received by the Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) on July 31, 2015, and 
the record closed on November 20, 2015.5 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 DOHA administrative judges must make certain that an applicant “received fair 
notice of the issues raised, had a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and 
was not subjected to unfair surprise.” ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 
2014). See also, Directive, ¶ E3.1.10, administrative judges are responsible for ensuring 
                                                          
2 Prior to scheduling the hearing, Applicant’s former counsel requested to withdraw from the matter and I 
granted said request. See Hx. I.  
 
3 ISCR Case No. 04-11571 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2007) (“By design, the DOHA process encourages 
Judges to err on the side of initially admitting evidence into the record, and then to consider a party’s 
objections when deciding what, if any, weight to give to that evidence.”).  
 
4 Ex. D is a U.S. State Department document regarding U.S. relations with South Korea. This exhibit was 
admitted without objection and the facts highlighted by Applicant are accepted for administrative notice. 
Tr. at 37-38, 68-69. 
 
5 The record was originally kept open until August 7, 2015. I reopened the record in light of a recent 
Appeal Board decision to permit the Government to supply copies of the source documents referenced in 
Ex. 2. See Hx. III – V. Department Counsel submitted portions of the source documents, which were 
marked Hx. VI and admitted into the record without objection.  
 
3 
 
 
that DOHA proceedings are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” 
Accordingly, to ensure Applicant was provided fair notice of the evidence to be offered 
against him at hearing and to alleviate the danger of unfair surprise, I issued a 
prehearing order requiring the parties to exchange documents, to include any request 
for administrative notice, prior to the hearing. See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) II.6 
 
 Department Counsel complied with the order and sent Applicant their request for 
administrative notice, as well as the source documents cited in the request, well in 
advance of the hearing. Tr. at 32-33. After the hearing, Applicant objected to 
Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice. Specifically, the portion of Ex. 2 
seeking administrative notice that the 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage (Annual Report) “ranks Korea as one of 
the seven countries most actively engaging in foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage against the United States.” And, the adverse inference that South Korea 
remains an active foreign collector of U.S. information based on a short passage from 
the 2007 Annual Report noting that the major foreign collectors remain “active.” See Ex. 
2 at 1-2.7 In challenging these proposed facts for administrative notice, Applicant 
provided updated versions of the Annual Report, which were admitted as Ex. G. 
 
 Post-hearing, Department Counsel submitted the cover sheet and a page from 
the appendix of the 2000 Annual Report. See Hx. VI. The appendix provides the 
responses of less than 12 unnamed U.S. companies, not the findings or 
pronouncements of a federal department, agency, or official. These company officials 
provided the adverse “ranking” about South Korea requested for administrative notice. 
Nowhere else in the 2000 Annual Report is South Korea identified as engaging in 
collection activity against the United States. Subsequent Annual Reports identify other 
countries that engaged in such activity, but South Korea is not one of those countries.  
 
 After reviewing the source documents and applicable Appeal Board precedent, I 
am not convinced that the proposed fact and adverse inference Department Counsel 
wants me to draw regarding South Korea are proper for administrative notice. In short, I 
am not convinced that these matters are the official position of the U.S. Government 
regarding South Korea. Thus, they are not suitable for administrative notice.  
                                                          
6 See also, ISCR Case No. 01-26893 n. 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002) (“official or administrative notice can 
be taken of authoritative statements or documents made or issued by the President of the United States 
or appropriate federal departments, agencies, or officials . . . Of course, such action should be 
undertaken with reasonable notice to applicants to avoid undue surprise or unfairness in these 
proceedings.”) (emphasis added).  
 
7 Applicant states: “I noticed a false statement on [Ex. 2]. . . . On the bottom paragraph, on page 1 of (Ex. 
2), it stated that The Annual Report released in 2008 indicates that the major foreign collectors remain 
active" which reference “2007 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage” implying that South Korea is one of major foreign collectors. I reviewed Annual Report of 
2007 but it only states that “The bulk of the collection activity, however, comes from denizens of a core 
group of fewer than 10 countries, which include China and Russia”, South Korea is not mentioned as a 
collector. Rather, Appendix B of the same document specify the countries involved espionage in 2007; 
China, Cuba, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Suriname, Taiwan, and United Arab Emirates are 
among the list, but NOT South Korea.” Ex. E (emphasis in original).  
 
4 
 
 
 However, I collectively marked as Ex. 3 the four pages from the 2000 and 2007 
Annual Reports that were submitted post-hearing; admitted Ex. 3 into the record; and 
given it the appropriate weight in assessing the foreign influence security concern. See 
ISCR Case No 03-21434 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007), after upholding judge’s 
decision not to accept the 2000 Annual Report for administrative notice for similar 
reasons noted herein, the Board remanded the case to permit Department Counsel to 
reoffer the report “for inclusion in the record as an ordinary exhibit . . . [in order] to 
permit the development of a full and complete record by the parties.”  
 
Republic of Korea (South Korea) 
 
 After thoroughly considering the evidence and documents admitted into the 
record, both at hearing and post-hearing, I take administrative notice of the following 
relevant facts regarding South Korea: 
 
 South Korea is a stable, democratic country. The United States and South Korea 
have been close allies since 1950. U.S.-South Korea ties are based on common values 
of democracy, human rights, and the rule of law. The United States has maintained 
military personnel stationed in South Korea in support of the U.S. commitment to help 
South Korea defend itself against external aggression, primarily from the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea). In recent years, the U.S.-South Korea 
alliance has expanded into a deep, comprehensive global partnership. The U.S. State 
Department recently noted that “People-to-people ties between the United States and 
South Korea have never been stronger.” (Ex. D)  
 
 The government of South Korea generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens. Security forces reported to civilian authorities, which maintained effective 
control over security forces and those forces did not commit human rights abuses. The 
U.S. State Department’s recent human rights report regarding South Korea reflects:  
 
The primary human rights problems reported were the government’s 
interpretation of the National Security Law (NSL) and other laws to limit 
freedom of expression and restrict access to the internet . . . . The law 
prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, and the government generally 
observed these prohibitions. The NSL grants authorities the power to 
detain, arrest and imprison persons believed to have committed acts 
intended to endanger the “security of the state.”   
 
(Ex. 2, Source Document XIII at 1 and 3) 
 
 South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of export controlled dual-use 
U.S. technology. (Ex. 2 at 2)  
 
 
5 
 
 
 The following information regarding South Korea is not proper for administrative 
notice.8 However, it derives from evidence offered by Department Counsel that provides 
further historical context to the matters accepted for administrative notice regarding 
South Korea’s unauthorized receipt of export controlled U.S. technology. Applicant 
received notice regarding the Government’s intent to offer this evidence, was provided 
an opportunity to litigate and challenge the evidence, and he did not object to its 
admission. Although the source document the adverse information is based upon is 
somewhat dated, Applicant failed to provide any evidence to contradict or rebut it. 
Consequently, I have considered the following information regarding South Korea in 
assessing the potential for a heightened risk of foreign influence. 
 
In 1996, an unofficial U.S. Government publication noted that South Korea 
had a history of collecting protected U.S. information. (Ex. 2, Source 
Document I)9  Also, nearly 20 years ago, a South Korean native who 
became an American citizen and worked as a computer specialist for the 
U.S. Navy was convicted of committing espionage for South Korea – he 
admitted to giving secret DOD and State Department documents to an 
agent of South Korea. (Ex. 2, Source Document IV at 2)10   
 
 
                                                          
8 See generally, ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007), noting that DOHA administrative 
judges may take official notice of uncontroverted facts, such as “Official pronouncements by the 
President, State Department, Department of Defense, or other appropriate federal agency on matters of 
national security are equivalent to legislative facts for purposes of DOHA adjudications in that they bind 
the Judge and are not subject to refutation.” 
 
9 Department Counsel submitted this proposed fact for administrative notice, and cited a 1996 
Interagency OPSEC Support Staff Intelligence Threat Handbook. In ISCR Case No 03-21434, the Appeal 
Board held, inter alia, an administrative judge’s refusal to accept for administrative notice the Handbook 
was proper, because “the document on its face states it is ‘an unofficial publication of the U.S. 
Government. Contents are not necessarily the views of, or endorsed by, any Government agency.’ In light 
of the caveat quoted above, we find no reason to conclude that the Judge abused his discretion in 
declining to take official notice of this document.” Id. at 3. Post-hearing, Department Counsel submitted 
the index and a few pages from the Handbook. At the bottom of the index page is the website for the 
Federation of American Scientist (FAS). The FAS is not a U.S. Government agency. Instead, it is “a non-
profit membership organization, with members from the academic, non-profit and government 
communities” that was originally founded by “many of the Manhattan Project scientists who wanted to 
prevent nuclear war, and it is one of the longest serving organizations in the world dedicated to reducing 
nuclear and other catastrophic threats and informing the public debate by providing technically-based 
research and analysis on these issues.” Publically available at https://fas.org/about-fas, and has been 
included in the record as Hx. VII. An administrative judge may only accept those matters that are proper 
for administrative notice. Here, I am unconvinced that this proposed fact is the official position of the U.S. 
Government. Accordingly, it is not proper for administrative notice. 
 
10 In ISCR Case No. 04-11571 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2007), the Board cautioned DOHA judges on the 
over reliance on “court decisions evidencing a single, anectodal, incident of espionage on behalf of a 
foreign country, are not particularly probative as to the overall political and intelligence profile of that 
country vis-à-vis the United States. Therefore, such documents should be accorded considerably less 
weight than official executive branch documents and reports describing in broader terms the political and 
intelligence profile, or the human rights record, of a foreign country.” Thus, I have not accepted this matter 
for administrative notice, but as evidence relevant to the heightened risk analysis. 
 
6 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant was born in South Korea. He earned a degree in business 
administration in South Korea, and immigrated to the United States in 1999. He earned 
a degree in business information technology from a U.S. school in 2002, and became a 
U.S. citizen in 2013. A coworker submitted a statement noting Applicant’s work ethic, 
integrity, trustworthiness, and high character. (Tr. at 41-43; Ex. 1; Ax. C) 
 
Applicant’s wife is also a naturalized U.S. citizen, and they have two children who 
were born in the United States. Applicant and his wife have rented their home for the 
past four years. Applicant has a U.S. retirement account valued at less than $10,000. 
He and his wife do not have any foreign financial investments, property, or interests. 
One of Applicant’s siblings, who is alleged at SOR 2.e, and all of his wife’s family are 
U.S. citizens living in the United States. (Tr. at 41-47; Ex. 1; Ex. A; Ex. E; Ex. F) 
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer for the past three years. This is his 
first application for a security clearance. He disclosed on his application his foreign 
familial connections and travel to South Korea. (Tr. at 44, Ex. 1) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, and three of his siblings are resident-citizens of South 
Korea. Applicant’s father, a retired employee of the South Korean government, receives 
a pension from the government of South Korea. Applicant sent his mother about $2,000 
on her birthday. He traveled to South Korea for his father’s 80th birthday about a month 
before his hearing. He communicates frequently with his parents. His three siblings in 
South Korea have no connection to the government of South Korea or other foreign 
country. He communicates with them less frequently than he does his parents. (Tr. at 
49-66) His family in South Korea is aware that he is applying for a U.S. security 
clearance. (Tr. at 51-52) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
 
7 
 
 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 
2009), “[o]nce a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.11 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, a 
clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s sibling identified in SOR 2.e, resides in the United States. Applicant’s 
connection to and contact with this family member does not raise a foreign influence 
security concern. Thus, SOR 2.e is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s connection to and contact with his close family 
members in South Korea requires further analysis. An individual is not automatically 
disqualified from holding a security clearance because of their familial connections in a 
foreign country. Instead, in assessing an individual’s vulnerability to foreign influence, 
an administrative judge must take into account the foreign government; the intelligence 
gathering history of that government; the country’s human rights record; and other 
pertinent factors.12  
 
 South Korea is a staunch ally of the United States, and is a democratic nation 
governed by the rule of law. However, foreign influence security concerns are not 
limited to countries hostile to the United States. The Appeal Board has cautioned DOHA 
administrative judge’s against overreliance on “simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ 
nations and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B,” because such 
“ignores the historical reality that (i) relations between nations can shift, sometimes 
dramatically and unexpectedly; (ii) even friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters that they view as important to their 
vital interests or national security; and (iii) not all cases of espionage against the United 
States have involved nations that were hostile to the United States.” ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
Here, Applicant’s familial connections in South Korea, as alleged in SOR 2.a – 
2.d, raise the foreign influence security concern. Applicant’s contacts with his parents, 
who are financially dependent on South Korea, raise a heightened risk of foreign 
influence. Furthermore, the information received into the record regarding South Korea, 
coupled with its unauthorized receipt of export controlled dual-use U.S. technology, 
raises a reasonable inference that, at least, in the past South Korea was engaged in 
espionage-related activity targeting the United States.13 Accordingly, the record 
evidence establishes the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (emphasis added) (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
12 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge 
must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
13 See also, ISCR Case No. 14-02496 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015) and ISCR Case No. 11-02842 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 7, 2012), where Board upheld adverse determinations involving familial connections to another 
staunch U.S. ally with a past history of espionage-related activity targeting the United States. 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 An individual with close relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not 
insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign familial 
ties. I have considered all the applicable mitigating conditions, and the following were 
potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. Applicant’s parents are financial dependent, in large 
measure, on the pension his father receives from the government of South Korea. 
Although South Korea is a democratic country that follows the rule of law, its past 
history of espionage-related activity targeting protected U.S. information and receipt of 
export controlled dual-use technology raises concerns that subtle forms of foreign 
influence or pressure could be brought to bear on Applicant through his parents.  
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. Applicant’s ties to the United States are not 
insignificant. He has lived in the United States for nearly a decade. He resides, works, 
and has started a family in the United States. However, his relationship with and strong 
bonds to his family in South Korea, primarily his parents, raises the concern that he 
could be placed in the unenviable position of having to choose between his loved ones 
residing in a foreign country and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR Case 
No. 01-26893 at 9-10 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002), “[e]ven good people can pose a security 
risk because of facts and circumstances not under their control.” 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my Guideline B analysis. Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
presented a strong case in mitigation and in support of his request for access to 
classified information, to include his honesty from the start of the security clearance 
process. However, this and the other favorable record evidence are insufficient to 
outweigh the security concern posed by his connections to and contact with his close 
family members in South Korea. Consequently, I resolve the foreign influence security 
concerns raised by Applicant’s familial connections to South Korea in favor of national 
security. AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 At the same time, I note that this adverse finding is “not a comment on 
Applicant’s patriotism but merely an acknowledgment that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, 
such as a family member.” ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009).  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
