 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05781 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The favorable 
information in the record regarding Applicant’s financial history is enough to rebut the 
concerns raised in the SOR. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 16, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel timely exercised their right to request a 
hearing in this case.2 On July 22, 2015, I issued a prehearing order to the parties 
regarding the exchange and submission of discovery, the filing of motions, and the 
disclosure of any witnesses.3  The parties complied with the terms of the order.4 At the 
hearing, convened on August 13, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, without objection.  After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE A through 
E, which were also admitted without objection.5  I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 
19, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 60, has worked for a federal contractor as a mail courier for 28 years. 
He has held a security clearance since 1990 without incident. During the course of his 
most recent periodic reinvestigation, the Government obtained a May 2013 credit report 
bearing Applicant’s last name and social security number indicating that Applicant had 
at least five delinquent accounts totaling $7,000. Based on this and another credit report 
dated September 2014, the SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to six creditors for 
approximately $11,500. In response to the SOR, Applicant denied the alleged debts on 
the grounds that they do not belong to him.6  
  
 As part of its case-in-chief, the Government offered three credit reports. 
Applicant’s last name and social security number is correct on each report. But, each 
report was run using a different variation of Applicant’s name. None of the reports were 
run using his forename, middle name or initial, and surname. All three of the reports 
have other addresses listed for Applicant, who has lived at the same address, his 
parents’ home, his entire life. Two of the credit reports list the same but incorrect 
birthdate for Applicant. The specific defects of each credit report are described in the 
following table: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 Correspondence regarding the conversion of the case to a hearing is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit  (HE) I. 
 
3 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as HE II.  
 
4 The discovery letter, dated July 6, 2015 is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
5 Correspondence regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submissions are appended to the record as HE IV. 
 
6 Tr. 22-23; GE 1-5; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
Exhibit 
No. 
Date Name 
Variation 
Reported Alias Reported DOB No. of 
Addresses 
Reported 
GE 3 June 29, 2015 Nickname 
Middle Initial  
Surname 
Surname 
Middle Initial  
Forename 
Wrong Month 
Wrong Date 
Wrong Year 
5 
GE 4 Sept. 18, 2014 Nickname 
Surname 
None None 3 
GE 5 May 1, 2013 Nickname 
Middle Name 
Surname 
Forename 
Surname 
Middle Initial 
Wrong Month 
Wrong Date 
Wrong Year 
2 
 
In addition to the credit reports, the Government also offered Applicant’s security 
clearance application and a summary of his background interview. The security 
clearance application does not contain any adverse information regarding Applicant’s 
financial history. The background interview summary indicates that Applicant had no 
knowledge of the delinquent accounts being reported in the May 2013 credit report.  
 
In response to the Government’s evidence, Applicant reiterated his denials. He 
admitted that five to seven years ago he accumulated some debt. It is unclear if the 
debts to which Applicant referred were delinquent or if he merely carried a level of debt 
that made him uncomfortable. With the help of his father, Applicant developed and 
executed a repayment strategy that allowed him to pay off the debts over the course of 
one year.  Applicant testified that after paying off his debts, he has not had a credit card 
for the last six years. The financial records showing Applicant’s debt repayments have 
long since been destroyed and his father died in 2012. However, Applicant’s sister 
provided a letter corroborating Applicant’s testimony.7  
 
 Applicant, who earns approximately $20,000 annually, testified that he lives 
within his means. He has some savings because his mother sets aside some of the rent 
he pays for that purpose.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
7 Tr. 24-28, 30; AE B.  
 
8 Tr. 28, 41-44. 
 
4 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes six delinquent accounts, totaling $11,500. 
Because Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations, Department Counsel has the 
burden of proving the controverted facts.10 To that end, Department Counsel offered,   
three credit reports, GE 3 through 5, bearing Applicant’s last name and social security 
number. These credit reports are enough to establish the Government’s prima facie 
case that Applicant has a history of not paying his bills and that he has demonstrated an 
inability or unwillingness to do so.11  
 
Although the credit reports are sufficient to satisfy the government’s burden of 
proof, this does not mean the credit reports are unassailable and not subject to dispute. 
Each of the three credit reports contains discrepant identifying information that calls into 
question the accuracy and reliability of each report. The flaws in the credit reports are 
significant and provide a reasonable basis for Applicant to dispute the legitimacy of the 
delinquent debts in the SOR.12  
 
When the adverse evidence in the record, three credit bureau reports, is weighed 
against the evidence favorable to Applicant — his credible testimony regarding his 
financial history, his sister’s corroboration of those statements, as well as Applicant’s 
long employment and clearance histories — the favorable evidence is enough to rebut, 
explain, and mitigate the financial considerations concerns.  
 
Accordingly, I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The record does not support a finding that Applicant has engaged 
in behaviors that suggest that he is irresponsible, unreliable, or unable to properly 
handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 DOD Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
12 AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
