 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-03858 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his past financial trouble. He 
moved to a high-cost area of living upon a change in military assignments. He was 
unable to keep pace with ever increasing expenses, primarily his mortgage, and 
accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt. After negotiating a modification of 
his mortgage, Applicant reached out to his overdue creditors and either paid or is paying 
his debts. He has received financial counseling and his past financial trouble no longer 
raises concerns about his judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 On October 10, 2014, Applicant answered 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
the SOR, submitted six attachments (Atch. 1 – 6), and requested a hearing to establish 
his eligibility for continued access to classified information (Answer).2  
 
On June 18, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed to hearing. After conferring with the parties, 
Applicant’s hearing was scheduled for and held on September 24, 2015. See Hearing 
Exhibit (Hx.) I, scheduling correspondence.3 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits (Ex. 1 – 4).4 Applicant 
testified and offered 21 exhibits (Ex. A – U). He requested additional time post-hearing 
to supplement the record. I granted his request, and he timely submitted four additional 
exhibits (Ex. V – Y).5 All exhibits, whether submitted pre-hearing, at hearing, or post-
hearing, were admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was 
received on October 2, 2015, and the record closed on October 13, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is married and is the father of four children. He is currently pursuing a 
doctorate in accounting. He has been with his current employer for over six years. He 
has received a number of promotions in the past few years, reflecting his work 
performance and ability to secure additional business for his employer. He is also a 
reserve member of the U.S. military. He rose to the rank of sergeant before being 
selected for officer training school and earning a commission as an officer. He has 
received successive promotions in the military over the years, attaining his current rank 
of lieutenant colonel. He has held a clearance continuously since being commissioned 
as a second lieutenant almost twenty years ago. (Tr. at 26-35, 62-65; Ex. 1; Ex. M – S) 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems relate to his move in 2005, which was 
triggered by a new military assignment. He moved from a relatively low-cost area of 
living to a high-cost area of living. For instance, his monthly mortgage payments nearly 
doubled, going from $2,600 to approximately $5,000. Initially, after the move, 
Applicant’s wife did not have a job. He was also paying to maintain two households, as 
his old home did not sell for several months after the move. Although Applicant was 
able to meet the mortgage payments on his new home on his salary alone for some 
time, he started relying on credit cards to pay some recurring monthly expenses, 
                                                          
2 Upon a review of the transcript (Tr.), two documents were incorrectly marked as Atch. 4. I have re-
marked them as Atch. 4 and 4A, and they are both admitted into the record. See Tr. at 21 – 24. 
 
3 The Government declined the opportunity to explain the almost yearlong delay in processing Applicant’s 
case for hearing. See Hx. II, Government’s legal brief at 4, claiming that such inquiry is “an unauthorized 
invasion into the Government’s attorney work product.” Thus, the record is silent on the issue. However, 
as Applicant did not claim any prejudice from the delay and the delay appears to have worked in his 
favor, I find that he suffered no apparent prejudice. ISCR Case No. 08-10170 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2011). 
 
4 The only credit report submitted by the Government, Ex. 3, is from 2013. 
 
5 Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits were remarked with the letters noted above. The parties’ exhibit lists 
are included in the record as Hx. III – V. Department Counsel’s position regarding Applicant’s post-
hearing submission is included in the record as Hx. VI. 
 
3 
 
including education-related expenses for one of his children who suffers from a learning 
disability. (Tr. at 35-44, 71-74) 
 
Applicant’s financial situation worsened in 2010, when the interest rate on his 
adjustable rate mortgage rose and his new monthly mortgage payments increased to 
$6,200. By 2012, Applicant had fallen behind on his mortgage and other financial 
obligations. (Tr. at 35-44, 50-51) He testified that, at that point, “everything was just 
spiraling out of control.” (Tr. at 51) Applicant and his wife contemplated filing for 
bankruptcy and walking away from the mortgage on their new home, whose value had 
plummeted and currently is worth about $100,000 less than what they originally paid for 
it. (Tr. at 60, 78-79) Ultimately, Applicant decided to work with his overdue creditors to 
resolve his past-due debts because, as he explained at hearing: 
 
We thought about it [filing for bankruptcy], but then again, I am an officer 
and I have to be responsible for my obligations. The same thing with the 
house. We thought about walking away. A lot of people did. A lot of people 
let their houses go into foreclosure, but we decided not to. We would just 
stick it out, tough it out and just ride it out. (Tr. at 58) 
 
Since 2012, Applicant has made significant strides in putting his financial house 
in order. First, he reached out to his lender and negotiated a mortgage modification. He 
now has a 30-year mortgage, with a fixed 4.5% interest rate. He has been paying his 
monthly mortgage payments on time and the mortgage is current. (Tr. at 37-42, 54-55; 
Ex. I)6 Second, Applicant negotiated an installment agreement with the IRS to resolve 
his past-due taxes. He has been repaying his federal tax debt on a consistent basis for 
the past 18 months. He has timely filed his tax returns and paid the amount of taxes 
owed, if any, for the past two years. (Tr. at 55-58, 67-69; Ex. J)7 Third, Applicant 
contacted his other overdue creditors and resolved his debts, to include those listed on 
the SOR. He submitted documentary proof to substantiate his testimony of resolving the 
SOR debts. (Tr. at 35-52; Ex. B – G; Ex. U – X)8  
 
Applicant disclosed his past-due debts on his recent security clearance 
application. He has received financial counseling, learned how to budget, and submitted 
a detailed budget and plan to remain financially secure. He and his wife contribute to 
their employer-sponsored 401(k) accounts and, combined, have over $100,000 in 
                                                          
6 Applicant’s mortgage is referenced at SOR 1.g. 
 
7 Applicant’s accrual of a sizeable tax debt because of his failure to timely pay his federal taxes over a 
number of years has a “direct bearing” on his eligibility. ISCR Case No. at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015). 
However, unlike other cases, Applicant presented substantial evidence of financial reform and 
rehabilitation mitigating the heightened security concerns arising from his past tax debt. Specifically, 
Applicant reached out to the IRS to resolve his tax debt, provided documentation of consistent monthly 
payments to resolve the tax debt over a lengthy period of time, reformed his behavior that led to the tax 
debt in the first place and has timely paid his tax obligation over the past several years. He also 
addressed other debts incurred during a period of financial difficulty.  
 
8 In case of appellate review, the following is provided for ease of reference regarding the non-mortgage 
and non-tax related SOR debts:  1.a (Tr. at 35-37, 42-44; Ex. B – C); 1.b (Tr. at 44-46; Ex. D); 1.c (Tr. at 
46-50; Ex. U – X); 1.d (Tr. at 50-52; Ex. F); 1.e (Tr. at 52-53; Ex. G); and 1.f (Tr. at 53-54; Ex. H). 
 
4 
 
retirement savings. Applicant timely pays his mortgage and other monthly expenses. He 
estimates that, after paying recurring monthly expenses, his family has approximately 
$2,000 a month in disposable income to use for emergencies and pay debts. He has not 
incurred any other past-due debts. (Tr. at 59-66, 76-83; Ex. 1; Ex. K – L; Ex. Y) 
Numerous individuals who have known Applicant both professionally and socially for 
years submitted letters attesting to his professionalism, honesty, and reliability. (Ex. T) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
An administrative judge must ensure that due process proceedings are 
conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges are 
required to make certain that an applicant “received fair notice of the issues raised, had 
a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and was not subjected to unfair 
surprise.” ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014)  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the paramount importance of protecting national security in all 
suitability determinations, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern 
arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.”). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
 
5 
 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
Applicant’s past financial problems raise the financial considerations concern. 
The record evidence also raises the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems started when he moved to a high-cost area of 
living when he received orders for a new military assignment. His decision to attempt to 
maintain for his family the same standard of living they had previously enjoyed is 
understandable, but not a matter outside of his control. His wife’s past unemployment 
and his child’s learning disability were matters beyond his control that impacted his 
financial situation. AG 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant did not ignore his financial obligations. Instead, he negotiated a 
modification of his mortgage, and then methodically and systematically addressed each 
one of his outstanding debts. He has received financial counseling and put his financial 
house in order. His past financial trouble no longer raises concerns about his judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. AG ¶¶ 20(a) , 20(c), and 20(d) fully apply. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of clearance 
holders.9 Applicant met his burden of persuasion.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been upfront and candid about his financial situation since the start of the security 
clearance process. Furthermore, he has maintained a security clearance and handled 
sensitive information, in and out of uniform, without issue for nearly twenty years. This 
favorable record evidence and Applicant’s responsible action in addressing his finances 
mitigates the financial considerations security concern.  
 
 A security clearance determination is not intended to punish an individual for past 
conduct or circumstances. Instead, these decisions serve as predictive judgments about 
an individual’s security suitability, where the individual’s past conduct is the best 
indicator of future behavior.10 Here, Applicant has demonstrated through the manner in 
which he responsibly addressed his financial situation that he possesses the requisite 
good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to continue to be entrusted with classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s continued eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:         For Applicant 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
10 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013). See also, ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 
(App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are not an exact science, but rather 
predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that person's past conduct and 
present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529).  
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
