KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The filing of tax returns is both a legal and a financial obligation. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02930.a1
DATE: 12/09/2015
DATE: December 9, 2015
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02930
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
William C. Fanning, Jr., Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 7, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
2
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On September 14, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his whole-person
analysis; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military from 1967 to 1973.  He holds an associate’s degree and
has received several technical training certificates.  He has held a clearance since 1973.
Applicant did not file Federal or state income tax returns for tax years 2004 through 2013.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the two allegations, stating that he was working on
submitting returns for both taxing authorities by April 15, 2015.  
Applicant divorced his second wife in 2006, after a 2003 separation.  He stopped filing his
returns after this separation, due to his emotional disruption and to his difficulty in obtaining
necessary documents.  He did not file for more recent years because he was devoting his time to
tending a critically ill fiancée.  In May 2015, Applicant retained a lawyer and in June an accountant.
Applicant owes no back taxes.  His 2013 and 2014 returns have been filed and he stated that the
others would be filed “shortly.”  Decision at 4.  Applicant lost refunds for tax years 2004 to 2010.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised the following Disqualifying
Condition: “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required[.]” Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(g).  The Judge noted that Applicant did not file his delinquent returns until long
after he had declared an intent to file them by April 2014.  The Judge cited to Applicant’s regular
mortgage payments and to his timeliness on paying other bills as evidence of his financial
management skills, which, he stated, showed that Applicant could comply with rules and regulations
“when it is in his interest to do so.”  Id. at 7.  Even though acknowledging Applicant’s marital
separation and the death of his fiancée, the Judge stated that Applicant’s procrastination in filing his
returns was irresponsible.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s military service
and many years of holding a security clearance.  However, he stated that Applicant should have
known that he had to file income tax returns, even if he were owed refunds.  He stated that
Applicant’s track record of 10 years procrastination made it too soon to conclude that his security-
significant conduct was behind him. 
Discussion
3
Applicant notes that the only Disqualifying Condition that the Judge applied was 19(g).  He
argues that this Guideline is “intended to concern someone in financial difficulties.”  Appeal Brief
at 2 (emphasis in original). To the extent that he is contending that Applicant’s case does not raise
security concerns, Guideline F is not limited to cases in which an applicant is financially insolvent
or is experiencing difficulty in paying debts.  The Guideline F concern states, in pertinent part, that
failure
to meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18.  
The filing of tax returns is both a financial and a legal obligation.  Applicant’s admitted failure to
have done so for many years is sufficient to raise a concern that he may be unwilling to follow other
rules and regulations, such as those that govern the handling of classified information.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) (A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his
or her legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability
required of those granted access to classified information).  See also Cafeteria & Restaurant
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886
(1961).  Indeed, as the Judge noted, Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(g) explicitly provides that failure
to file tax returns is a circumstance that can raise a security concern.  Moreover, the Directive
presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct under any of the Guidelines and an
applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See. e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04648 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9,
2015).  In this case, Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption of nexus.  We find
no reason to disturb the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s conduct raised Financial Considerations
security concerns.
Applicant cites to evidence of his having filed his tax returns.  He argues that he himself is
the only one hurt by his conduct, insofar as he is precluded from receiving refunds for earlier years.
He also argues that there is no penalty for failure to file tax returns.  Applicant’s arguments are not
enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-08412 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).  Although the Judge found that
Applicant had filed his most recent returns by the close of the record, his analysis focused on the
extent to which Applicant’s conduct called his judgment into question.  In particular, his conclusion
that repeated failure to file tax returns over a ten-year period is not reasonably explained by a
divorce or a critically ill fiancée is sustainable, given the record that was before him.  Applicant has
not provided a reason to disturb the manner in which the Judge weighed the evidence.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015) (Even if an applicant has paid his
delinquent debts or otherwise resolved his financial deficiencies, a Judge may still consider the
underlying circumstances in evaluating the applicant’s security eligibility).  
Concerning Applicant’s argument about penalties, we note that 26 U.S.C. §§ 6651 and 7203
provide civil and criminal penalties respectively for failure to file federal returns.  There is nothing
in the record to show that these provisions do not apply to Applicant as a matter of law or as a matter
4
of discretion by tax officials.  As it stands, lack of record evidence that tax officials have sought
enforcement against Applicant is not sufficient to mitigate the concerns about Applicant’s judgment
that are the central issue in his case.  This also holds true for his argument that no one but him has
been hurt by his malfeasance.    
Applicant cites to language in his interview summary to the effect that no one knows about
his tax issues and that they cannot be used against him.  However, this represents Applicant’s
answers to the interviewer’s questions, not the interviewer’s independent judgment as to Applicant’s
security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03069 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2015).  Applicant
challenges the Judge’s application of the whole-person factors, repeating his argument that he is
financially secure and devoid of anything that would cast doubt upon his judgment and reliability.
We conclude that the Judge’s whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of the Directive
in that he considered Applicant’s security-significant conduct in light of the entirety of the record
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02806 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015). 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
5
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
