 Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-04939
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial problems
and by his decision to provide false answers in his security clearance application. His
request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On August 31, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, which included Applicant’s responses to interrogatories  from1
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 The list of Government’s exhibits is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.4
2
adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD), it could not be determined that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue to hold a security
clearance.  2
On February 27, 2015, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative
guidelines  for personal conduct (Guideline E) and financial considerations (Guideline3
F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and forwarded attached thereto
several documents included in the record without objection. (Tr. 17 - 18) Applicant
requested a hearing, and the case was assigned to another administrative judge on July
1, 2015. It was transferred to me on September 15, 2015, and I convened a hearing on
September 17, 2015. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 12.  Applicant testified and presented4
Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. All exhibits were admitted without objection. A transcript of
the hearing (Tr.) was received on September 25, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant filed a Chapter 13
bankruptcy petition in July 2007 that was dismissed in August 2007 (SOR 1.a); that he
filed another Chapter 13 petition in April 2008 that was dismissed in June 2008 (SOR
1.b); that he filed a Chapter 13 petition in November 2007 that was dismissed in
February 2008 (SOR 1.e); and that he owed $32,998 for 14 delinquent or past-due
debts (SOR 1.c, 1.d, 1.f - 1.q). At hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the allegations
at SOR 1.o and 1.p. (Tr. 8) Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant
made false official statements to the Government by deliberately omitting his debts and
bankruptcy filings from Section 26 (Financial Record) of his EQIP (SOR 2.a). 
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the
Guideline F allegations. He denied SOR 2.a. (Answer; Tr. 11 - 14) In addition to the
facts established through Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he works
as a remote field technician. From about 1991 until 2006, Applicant worked in a similar
job for a national telecommunications company. He was laid off when the company
declared bankruptcy and reorganized as part of a merger with another company in that
field. Unable to find similar work, Applicant started his own trucking and hauling
company. Unfortunately, that business venture failed with the economic recession.
3
Applicant was unemployed from late 2007 until he was hired for his current job in
December 2010. (Gx. 1; Gx. 6; Tr. 43)
Applicant and his wife have been married since August 2010; however, they
recently separated. Applicant has one child, now age 26. (Gx. 1; Tr. 52)
In July 2007, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection because he
was in danger of losing his home to foreclosure. The petition was dismissed in August
2007 because his attorney missed certain filing deadlines. The petition was re-filed in
November 2007 but dismissed for similar reasons in February 2008, and was filed a
third time in April 2008. The petition was again dismissed, this time at Applicant’s
request. Applicant’s attorney was later disbarred and has since passed away. Applicant
eventually lost his home to foreclosure. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 4; Gx. 6 - 12; Tr. 21- 22, 45,
106)
For Applicant’s trucking business, he owned five dump trucks used for hauling
services in and around the large metropolitan area where he was doing business. The
debts alleged at SOR 1.f - 1.l are for unpaid parking tickets incurred by his truck drivers
in the course of their work. In response to the SOR, and at the hearing, Applicant
established that, as of March 2015, he had paid or is close to paying each of those
debts. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 4; Gx. 6; Tr. 44, 47 - 48, 67)
The debts alleged at SOR 1.d and 1.q are for unpaid homeowners association
(HOA) fees related to Applicant’s ownership of a condo he bought as a rental property.
Applicant at one time owned as many as five properties, but now owns only the property
at issue in SOR 1.d. However, that property has been unoccupied for about three years.
Applicant insists he is able to cover all costs associated with the property while currently
repaying the SOR 1.d debt at a rate of $1,000 each month. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 6; Ax. A;
Tr. 46, 65 - 69, 99 - 100)
When Applicant was first hired for his current job, he applied for and was granted
eligibility for an ADP trustworthiness position so that he could access sensitive, but
unclassified, information. He filled out an SF 85 application, which is similar to the EQIP
he submitted as a clearance application. Applicant already was familiar with the
questions and topics of inquiry when he completed his EQIP. He did not disclose therein
any of the adverse financial information in his background. Applicant was later
interviewed about his finances by a Government investigator. The investigator asked
him about his negative answers to the EQIP financial questions and Applicant confirmed
his answers. The investigator then confronted Applicant with information in a 2012 credit
report about his Chapter 13 bankruptcy and his past-due and delinquent debts.
Applicant then provided information about the causes of his financial problems and the
corrective measures he had taken or intended to take. At hearing, Applicant reiterated
his denial of intentionally falsifying his EQIP. He explained his omissions occurred
because he either forgot about his debts, or that errors occurred because his wife
helped him complete the EQIP, he was not careful with his answers, or that he did not
 See Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
4
pay close enough attention to the questions because of personal turmoil in his life at the
time. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 6; Tr. 74 - 78, 81, 83 - 93)
Applicant testified that he earns about $3,200 each month after taxes and other
deductions, plus about $1,000 each month in work-related mileage expenses. Applicant
travels almost every week for his work. In response to a request for more detailed
information about his finances in interrogatories sent by DOD adjudicators, Applicant
declined to complete a personal financial statement (PFS). At his hearing, he referred
vaguely to other sources of income from mechanical and other work he performs
outside of his DOD-related work. Applicant also disclosed that he is repaying income tax
debts from his failure to file state and federal income tax returns between ten and fifteen
years ago. He characterized his monthly financial status as “breaking even.” (Gx. 6; Tr.
93 - 105)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
5
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that
is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, this record supports application of the disqualifying conditions
at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
6
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant started experiencing financial problems around 2006 when he was laid
off from a telecommunications job he had held for about 15 years. His small trucking
business failed a few years later because of reduced demand for services during the
economic recession after 2007. Applicant had other sources of income that was
insufficient to cover his expenses and he unsuccessfully tried filing bankruptcy to save
his home from foreclosure. It was not until 2010, when he was hired for his current job
that he started earning steady, significant income. Although it appears he has recently
repaid or otherwise resolved most of the debts alleged in the SOR, I remain concerned
by his failure to show that his current finances will remain sound. For example,
Applicant still has one rental property that has not produced income in three years.
Applicant also is still repaying income tax debts along with civil judgments for unpaid
HOA fees. Based on the financial information he provided in his testimony, it appears
that he is still struggling to make ends meet each month. 
Although he has taken action to resolve his debts, that action has only taken
place after issuance of the SOR. Applicant claimed that he has been hampered by the
need to resolve tax debts, not alleged in the SOR. However, he did not produce any
explanatory information or provide, in his response to interrogatories, any information
that would give the Government a better understanding of his current monthly finances.
Based on all of the foregoing, I conclude that none of the pertinent mitigating conditions
under this guideline apply. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion in response
to the Government’s information about his finances.
Personal Conduct
Applicant did not disclose in his EQIP any of the adverse financial information
alleged under Guideline F. Although he denies doing so intentionally, I conclude from all
of the available information probative of his intent in this regard that he knowingly and
wilfully withheld this information from his EQIP. Accordingly, a security concern arises
about Applicant’s personal conduct. It is articulated at AG ¶ 15, as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
7
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a) applies here:
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Applicant did not provide information sufficient to support application of any of
these mitigating conditions. Moreover, I did not find his testimony about why he omitted
information from his EQIP to be credible. Two years before completing his EQIP,
Applicant completed a position of trust application. He knew or should have know what
was required of him in submitting his clearance application, yet he did not disclose his
bankruptcy, civil judgments against him, or any of the other debts attributable to him.
Additionally, he compounded his deception by initially confirming those same false
answers when he met with a Government investigator. Applicant never tried to correct
his false statements, and the record evidence as a whole precludes application of any of
the mitigating conditions under this guideline. 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant did not submit any relevant information in this regard, and his
lack of candor about his finances leaves me with doubts about his suitability for access
to classified information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal
focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
8
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.n, 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.o - 1.p: Withdrawn
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
