 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04281 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. He failed to mitigate security concerns for 
personal conduct under Guideline E. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 5, 2014. (Item 4) 
After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On March 
28, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal conduct under 
Guideline E. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
 
2 
 
 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2015. He admitted 9 of the 13 
delinquent debts. He noted that he has or is making arrangements to pay six of the 
debts (SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.i). He stated two accounts have been paid 
(SOR 1.h and 1.k), and his wife is paying another account. (SOR 1.m) He denied four 
accounts (SOR 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, and 1.l). (Item 1) He did not respond to the falsification 
allegation under Guideline E even after being advised of the need to respond by 
Department Counsel. (Item 2) He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on July 
1, 2015. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on August 18, 
2015, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not file a reply to 
the FORM. I was assigned the case on December 1, 2015.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM agent (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate. He 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the Personal Subject Interview summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so 
he waived any objection to the admissibility of the Personal Subject Interview summary. 
I will consider information in the Personal Subject Interview in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 74-year-old high school graduate with some college credit. He has 
been employed by various defense contractors since at least December 1999 as a 
supply technician. He served as a federal police officer for approximately 25 years from 
December 1970 to May 1995. He served on active duty in the Army from June 1962 
until June 1965 and received an honorable discharge. He married in May 1991 and has 
one adult son. He and his wife separated in May 2008 and now live apart. Applicant was 
investigated for eligibility for access to classified information in June 1976, December 
1978, June 1988, and August 2000. He was granted eligibility for access to classified 
information. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated February 21, 2014).  
 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (Item 5, dated January 14, 2005; Item 6, dated 
March 7, 2014; and Item 7, dated June 25, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts 
for Applicant: a credit card collection account for $410 (SOR 1.a); a telephone debt in 
collection for $250 (SOR 1.b); a cable company debt in collection for $290 (SOR 1.c); a 
debt in collection for $500 (SOR 1.d); a rental debt in collection for $3,578 (SOR 1.e); a 
telephone debt in collection for $946 (SOR 1.f); a debt in collection for $912 (SOR 1.g); 
a telephone debt in collection for $1,181 (SOR 1.h); a car repossession debt charged off 
for $9,255 (SOR 1.i); a debt 120 days past due for $210 on a balance of $1,160 (SOR 
1.j); an account charged off for $471 (SOR 1.k); an automobile repossession debt 
charged off for $4,400; and a home improvement debt 90 days past due for $413 on a 
balance of $10,580 (SOR 1.m). The total amount of the alleged delinquent debt is 
$22,816.  
 
Applicant did not list any delinquent debts in response to financial questions on 
the e-QIP he submitted on February 21, 2014. When Applicant was interviewed by the 
OPM security investigator on June 5, 2014, he reported that his financial outlook was 
positive. He had financial problems in the past but his financial troubles have been 
resolved and his overall financial situation is getting better. All of his present financial 
obligations were timely paid. He reported to the investigator only one department store 
delinquent account. The debt was incurred by his wife and she did not make timely 
payments. Applicant said he made arrangements in January 2014 to pay $50 monthly 
on the debt. He is current with these payments. He informed the investigator that in the 
last seven years he had no other financial troubles or delinquent debts; that he had no 
judgments entered against him; there were no repossessions; no default on any loans; 
no bills or debts turned over for collection, charged off or late payments; and no credit 
cards cancelled. (Item 4, Personal Subject Interview, dated June 5, 2014, at 7) 
 
The security investigator questioned Applicant about debts that were on his credit 
reports. Applicant stated that he had no knowledge of the delinquent debts at SOR 1.a, 
1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.l, and 1.m.  
 
He also responded that he has no knowledge of the debt in collection for 
COMCAST at SOR 1.c. However, he reported he now has COMCAST service and that 
bill is current.  
 
The delinquent debt at SOR 1.i is for the remainder after a van repossession. 
Applicant reported that sometime in 2010 he defaulted on the $630 monthly loan 
payments for his van because of medical bills and treatments. He told the creditor to 
retrieve the vehicle. Since he did not consider this a repossession because he asked 
the creditor to take the vehicle, he did not report it as a repossession on his e-QIP. He 
agrees with the information on the credit report as to the amount still outstanding on the 
debt. He has not made any payments towards the debt.  
 
The delinquent debt at SOR 1.k was the remainder from an unpaid loan. 
Applicant secured a loan of approximately $4,200 in 2010 or 2011 to repair flood 
damage in his house. He reported that he repaid about $3,700 of the loan. He did not 
 
4 
 
 
have sufficient income to pay the remainder of the loan. He was on disability and only 
receiving $125 weekly from September to December 2010. He chose to disregard the 
debt because of lack of income. He was contacted in August 2012 about the debt and 
agrees with the amount listed on the credit report. He did not present any documents to 
verify payments made on this debt.  
 
Applicant informed the security investigator that he would research all of the 
delinquent debts discussed and obtain a copy of his credit report. He would resolve and 
settle as many of the delinquencies as he could. He had no timeframe for when he 
would resolve the debts because he did not know the amount of his debts. (Item 4, 
Personal Subject Interview, dated February 21, 2014 at 7-10) Applicant presented no 
information to show he researched his debts or the results of his research.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
5 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is 
documented in his credit reports. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition under AG 
¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis for the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s unpaid debts are a 
continuous course of conduct and thus current. Applicant stated that the cause of his 
delinquent debts was his cancer treatment starting in 2010.  
 
 Applicant indicated that some of the debts have been paid. He did not present 
any documentation to verify the payments on the debts, the status of the debts, or that 
the debts have been paid or resolved. He claimed to the OPM security investigator in 
June 2014 that he did not know about the majority of the delinquent debts. He told the 
investigator that he would research the debts and attempt to resolve them. He had two 
opportunities to report on the results of his research and effort, when he responded to 
the SOR and when he responded to the FORM. He has not provided any information on 
the result of his investigation or the status of the debts.  
 
 There are security concerns about Applicant lack of action concerning his 
delinquent debts. The existence of delinquent debts and lack of meaningful action to 
resolve them indicate that he has not acted reasonably under the circumstances. The 
debts have not been paid, and Applicant has not presented a reasonable plan to resolve 
his financial problems. With evidence of delinquent debt and no documentation to 
support responsible management of his finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control. Applicant's lack of documented action is significant and 
disqualifying. Based on the identified debts and the failure to make arrangements to pay 
his debts, it is clear that Applicant has not been reasonable and responsible in regard to 
his finances. His failure to act reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an 
indication that he may not protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant has 
not presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process (AG ¶ 
15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
Applicant did not provide any derogatory financial information provided on his 
security clearance application. As noted in the SOR and the credit reports, Applicant 
had significant delinquent debts. His failure to list his delinquent debts raises a security 
concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate 
omission concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the personal conduct allegation based on his failure 
to provide full and complete financial information on his e-QIP. I will treat his lack of an 
answer as a denial of an intentional falsification. Applicant told the OPM investigator 
that he was unaware of many of the debts. However, he was able to provide details on 
some of the debts when confronted with the debts by the security investigator. While 
there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a 
material fact in any written document or oral statement to the Government when 
applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, or inaccurate 
statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate 
if it is done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. Based on the information he 
provided the security investigator, I find that Applicant knew he had delinquent debt 
when he completed his e-QIP, and deliberately failed to provide correct and accurate 
financial information on the security clearance application.  
 
 I considered the following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before bin confronted with the facts: 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
cause by or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
 
8 
 
 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstance that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 These mitigating conditions do not apply. Failure to provide full and complete 
information in response to questions on a security clearance application is not a minor 
offense. This failure to provide accurate information was recent and frequent. Applicant 
failed to provide accurate information in reference to his finances on his security 
clearance application in February 2014 and again in response to questions from the 
security investigator when he told him that his finances were good and his debts 
current. He did not reveal information concerning his delinquent debts until confronted 
with them by the security investigator. Since he knew significant details about the debts 
when confronted with them, he must have known about the debts when he completed 
the e-QIP.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant knew he had delinquent 
debt when he completed his e-QIP and deliberately failed to provide full and accurate 
information concerning his finances on his e-QIP. He acknowledged some of his debts 
in his interview with the OPM investigator. He agreed to research the debts and 
 
9 
 
 
determine his liability for them. He never reported the result of his research or any 
action taken to resolve his debts. He has not provided sufficient credible documentary 
information to show reasonable and responsible action to address delinquent debts and 
resolve financial problems. Applicant has not demonstrated responsible management of 
his finances or a consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his financial situation and his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.m:  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
