 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00199 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant used marijuana four 
or five times a year until May 2013 and used hallucinogenic mushrooms three times 
stopping in 2010. Applicant mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on March 7, 2014, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons detailing security concerns. On October 28, 
2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated March 
12, 2015. The FORM contained eight attachments (Items).  
On April 27, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. No material was received. On August 5, 2015, I was 
assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted using marijuana and 
hallucinogenic mushrooms, with explanations. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as 
facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old and is being sponsored by a defense consulting 
contractor. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance. (Item 5) Applicant provided no 
information about his duty performance and provided no character reference letters. His 
last marijuana usage occurred in May 2013, on his 25th birthday. (Item 7) It is his 
intention not to use illegal drugs in the future. (Item 8)  He took responsibility for his past 
use and admitted his use on security forms. (Item 6)  
 
In May 2005, Applicant graduated from high school and was a university student 
until December 2012. (Item 7) Part of his illegal use of drugs occurred when he was a 
student and also employed. (Item 7) When Applicant completed his June 2013 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he indicated he had 
used marijuana four or five times a year from May 2000 (estimate) through May 2013. 
(Item 7) He wanted to be honest about his drug usage so he acknowledged his illegal 
drug use on his e-QIP, even though fellow peers encouraged him not to reveal the 
information. (Item 6) He also indicated between June 2009 and November 2010, he 
used hallucinogenic mushrooms two or three times, once at a music festival and once at 
a friend’s house. (Item 7, 8)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
3 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
Ending in 2010, Applicant used hallucinogenic mushrooms three times and until 
May 2013, he used marijuana four or five times a year. AG ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse” 
and AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession2” apply.  
                                                          
2 If an individual smokes marijuana they must also have possession of it. There is no evidence of 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 
4 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
  
 In May 2013, Applicant last used marijuana and more than five years ago he last 
used hallucinogenic mushrooms. He intends to never use illegal drugs again. He 
acknowledged his use was wrong. He takes responsibility for his actions and 
understands the consequences. Although encouraged not to disclose his illegal drug 
use on his e-QIP, he did so because he wanted to be honest about his past use. His 
last marijuana use occurred in May 2013 and he was a university student until 
December 2012.  
 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”3 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the absence 
of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge excessively 
emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, and gave 
too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
 
5 
Because of his abstention from marijuana use for two and a half years and his 
stated desire never to use illegal drugs again, there is reasonable certitude that he will 
continue to abstain from drug use. Applicant did not attempt to hide his illegal usage. He 
disclosed it on his e-QIP. Due to the passage of time since his last use and his stated 
intent not to use again, confidence is restored in his current reliability, trustworthiness 
and good judgment with respect to drug use. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s last use of 
hallucinogenic mushrooms was more than five years ago and that usage was very 
limited.  His marijuana usage was more extensive, four or five times a year, but that 
usage ended more than two years ago. It is also noted his last usage occurred less than 
six months after he left college. He has no intention of using illegal drugs again.  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing]. It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
6 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
