 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05597 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing background investigation, 
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) on January 31, 2015, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for 
Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information, implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
 
2 
 
 
In an undated letter, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 2, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained exhibits marked as 
Items 3 through 6. On November 10, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM and 
submitted additional information, which has been marked as Item 7. Items 3 through 7 
are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
December 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had five debts with past-due amounts totaling 
$107,038 and balances totaling $607,581. The two largest debts were real estate 
mortgage accounts. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied each allegation by 
indicating four accounts were resolved and one was disputed. A credit report dated 
March 20, 2014, substantiated each of the alleged debts.1 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old supervisory mechanic who has been working for a 
defense contractor since March 2013. He graduated from high school in 1988. He 
served in the U.S. Marine Corps for 22 years, served a tour of duty in Afghanistan in 
2009, and honorably retired in the grade of master sergeant (E-8) in 2011. He has been 
married twice. He married his current wife in 1992. He has three children, ages 15, 19, 
and 21. He was granted a security clearance in 2004.2 
 
 In his SCA dated March 3, 2014, Applicant disclosed that he had two past-due 
mortgage loans. He attributed his financial problems to a downturn in the economy. 
During the economic downturn, his wife’s annual salary decreased from about $87,000 
to about $40,000, and the value of their home fell approximately $150,000. He indicated 
that he was working with the mortgage lender to combine the two mortgages into one 
loan and thought the restructuring of the loans was accomplished. He later leaned the 
second mortgage was transferred to another lender. He first became aware of the 
transfer of the second mortgage about two years after the loan restructuring when he 
was contacted by personnel from the collections department of the second mortgage 
holder. He stated that he was working with the first and second mortgage holders to 
resolve the delinquent mortgages through a short sale of the property.3    
 
 During an interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
on April 21, 2014, Applicant is reported to have stated: 
 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 2, and 4. The credit report, however, reflected the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was $4,158 instead of 
$4,407 as listed in the SOR.  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Items 3 and 7.  
 
 
3 
 
 
[Applicant] volunteered that he has been delinquent in his mortgage 
payments since 7/2011 for a residence at [a specific location]. [He] 
indicates he purchased the home in 9/2003 in the amount of $550,000.00 
His monthly payments were $3,018.00. He made the payments on time 
until 7/2011. [He] indicates that he had retired from the military and 
opened up a coffee shop. He had applied for disability and tried to 
refinance his home though loan modification with [the lender] since he was 
retiring. [He] indicates the modification process has gone through denial 
three different times. Each time he reapplied, his case was transferred to 
several different loan officers until he could not support the monthly 
payments due to limited income. [He] indicates his coffee shop business 
was breaking even on finances. [He] indicates his home was in active 
foreclosure in [the local county] but had been brought out of foreclosure 
due to home being purchased on short sale 5/28/2014. [He] indicates the 
home has been sold for $349,000.00. [He] indicated [the first mortgage 
lender] told him they would charge off $150,000.4  
 
In the OPM interview, Applicant further indicated that, when the home was refinanced in 
2009, the lender claimed the insurance on the second mortgage loan. The insurance 
company later tried to collect the insurance payment ($50,000) from him. He indicated 
he disputed this debt because his closing documents reflected the $50,000 was 
included in the refinancing.5   
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a Settlement Statement (HUD-1) 
for the short sale that reflected the first mortgage holder received $315,363 from the 
sale and the second mortgage holder received $8,500. He also provided a letter from 
the second mortgage holder that reflected they offered to settle the debt for $11,000 
including the money received from the short sale.6   
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant also provided a receipt showing that the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($4,407) had been paid. He stated that he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d 
($817) and referenced an Attachment D that apparently showed it was paid. However, 
Attachment D was not appended to his Answer. He further indicated that he was 
disputing the traffic citation ($60) in SOR ¶ 1.e. He provided no documentation 
supporting that dispute.7  
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant provided documentation confirming that 
the first and second mortgages (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) had been paid or settled in full. A 
                                                          
4 Item 5.  
 
5 Item 5.  
 
6 Item 2.  
 
7 Item 2.  
 
 
4 
 
 
credit report dated September 2, 2015, reflected that Applicant had no past-due 
accounts.8 
  
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
                                                          
8 Items 6 and 7.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 A credit report established two disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 During an economic downturn, Applicant’s wife’s salary was cut in half and the 
value of their home plummeted. He eventually resolved the first mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
through a short sale and the second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b) through a settlement 
agreement. He provide proof of paying the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He indicated that he paid 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d and referenced a document showing the payment; however, that 
documentation was not included in the record. He disputes the $60 debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, 
and provided no documentation supporting that dispute. Despite failing to provide 
documentation showing resolution of two relatively small debts, he provided sufficient 
proof that he has acted responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts. His financial 
problems are being resolved and are under control. His past financial problems do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) 
and 20(c) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), and 20(e) partially apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.9 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, outweighs the security concerns at issue. Applicant met his burden of 
persuasion and mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  
                                                          
9 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
