 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01490 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption and 
psychological conditions. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On October 18, 2013, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued him 
a set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on November 15, 2013.2 On 
May 8, 2014, the DOD CAF issued him another set of interrogatories. He responded to 
the interrogatories on May 30, 2014.3 On January 21, 2015, the DOD CAF issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
                                                          
1
 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated July 24, 2013). 
 
2
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated November 15, 2013). 
 
3
 Item 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated May 30, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) and I (Psychological Conditions), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement, notarized February 11, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.4 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
mailed to Applicant on September 21, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within 
a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive, as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on October 1, 2015. The response was due on October 31, 2015. 
As of this date, Applicant had not submitted any response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on December 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to alcohol consumption and psychological conditions in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.c., and 2.a.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a customer service representative with his current employer since January 
2013.5 He was previously unemployed from July 2012 until January 2013.6 He is a May 
1991 high school graduate with a December 1997 bachelor’s degree in an unspecified 
discipline. Applicant also completed some graduate training, but did not obtain another 
degree.7 He has never served with the U.S. military.8 He was never granted a security 
clearance.9 Applicant was never married.10 
                                                          
4
 Item 1 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated February 11, 2015). 
 
5
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 10-11. 
 
6
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 11. 
 
7
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 8-10. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Alcohol Consumption and Psychological Conditions  
 
Applicant is a self-described alcohol-dependent whose drink of choice was beer 
and wine. He first consumed alcohol at the age of 21 when he drank an unspecified 
quantity of beer on weekends at parties with friends. The frequency increased to 
drinking alcohol nearly every day in approximately 1998. In November 2003, after some 
previous alcohol-related incidents, discussed further below, Applicant purportedly 
started taking sobriety seriously. He remained periodically “sober”, as opposed to 
“abstinent”, for approximately seven or eight years, briefly relapsed in 2011, and again 
in May 2014, although he was regularly attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings. Applicant characterized a May 2013 self-described relapse as the result of 
the stress of his new job. In January 2014, he indicated that the last time he consumed 
alcohol was in May 2013. He contended that for a period of 30 days in May 2013, he 
consumed an unspecified quantity of alcohol. He stated that he resumed sobriety and 
once again embraced AA.  
 
Applicant now attends AA meetings four to six times per week, has a sponsor, 
and is working the 12-step program. He re-established a network of individuals, 
including AA members, family, and his supervisor, to whom he can reach out if he feels 
the need to do so.11 In his psychological evaluation, conducted in October 2014, 
Applicant indicated he had been sober “for about five months now.”12 In his Answer to 
the SOR, he admitted that he had been “alcohol-free” since June 2014.13 
 
When Applicant consumed alcohol he was happy and euphoric. At times, he 
experienced slurred speech, staggering, and passing out. He acknowledged that 
alcohol may have had a negative impact on his attendance at graduate school and on 
his current employment (especially when he failed to call his supervisor and missed 
work one day).14 Applicant acknowledged that it was initially difficult for him to admit to 
himself and to others that he had relapsed. He also admitted that there are times when 
he feels anxious, but that he knows that taking a drink does not assuage that anxiety. 
He knows he needs to be vigilant and on-guard when it comes to alcohol. If he feels a 
craving or is uncomfortable, he reaches out to another sober individual for help. Those 
earlier urges have subsided since he started working on the 12-step program with his 
sponsor.15 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
8
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 13.  
 
9
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
10
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
11
 Item 4 (Affidavit, dated January 14, 2014), at 3; Item 3, supra note 2, at 3, 5; Item 9 (Psychological 
Evaluation, dated October 9, 2014), at 1-2. 
 
12
 Item 9, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
13
 Item 1, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
14
 Item 4, supra note 11, at 3. 
 
15
 Item 1, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
4 
                                      
 
 
Applicant has had several incidents with police and judicial authorities associated 
with his consumption of alcohol. In March 2000, after visiting a friend and consuming an 
unspecified quantity of beer, Applicant was driving home when he blacked out. The 
police stopped him for driving under the speed limit. He was administered a field 
sobriety test, which he failed. He was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI).16 Upon pleading no contest and being found guilty, Applicant was 
ordered to attend a three-day course on drinking and driving, his operator’s license was 
revoked (with an exception permitting him to drive to school) for six months, and he was 
ordered to pay $1,000 in fines and court costs.17  
 
In September 2003, after drinking wine heavily, and while driving, Applicant had 
the urge to urinate. He pulled into a parking lot to relieve himself when two police cars 
pulled up behind him. He was arrested and charged with public indecency due to 
intoxication. He was found guilty as charged, and sentenced to probation for six months, 
and ordered to pay an unspecified amount in fines and court costs.18  
 
In November 2003, on the anniversary of his father’s death, and during a period 
when his drinking admittedly had gotten “extremely out of hand,” despite being 
intoxicated, Applicant drove to a park. He was stopped by the police for expired tags on 
his motor vehicle. Applicant was administered a field sobriety test, which he failed. He 
was arrested and charged with DUI. Two hours later, he was administered a 
breathalyzer test, and it registered 0.195, well over the legal limit for intoxication. After 
spending one night in jail he was released. He subsequently pled no contest and was 
found guilty as charged. He was sentenced to ten days in jail, his operator’s license was 
suspended (with an exception permitting him to drive to work and AA meetings) for one 
year, and he was ordered to attend alcohol counseling.19 
 
 In addition to his attendance at, and participation in, a three-day course on 
drinking and driving in 2000, alcohol counseling in 2003, and AA meetings over a period 
of years, Applicant underwent alcohol and mental health counseling on a weekly basis 
from August 2, 2003 until June 18, 2005. The counselor, a licensed social worker (LSW) 
as well as a licensed independent chemical dependency counselor (LICDC), indicated 
that Applicant had discontinued counseling and was “unsuccessful in completing his 
treatment goals at that time.”20 The counselor’s “report” was in the form of a confidential 
letter to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). It failed to: discuss any 
                                                          
16
 Applicant described the incident as involving an OVI rather than a DUI.  OVI is an acronym for Operating a 
Vehicle Impaired, but the characterization did not come into effect until the state legislature changed it in January 
2005. Because there is no police incident report or court record in evidence, the sole source for the description of this 
and the ensuing events is Applicant’s recitation of the events. 
 
17
 Item 4, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
18
 Item 4, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
19
 Item 4, supra note 11, at 2-3. 
 
20
 Item 6 (Letter, dated May 28, 2014); Item 2, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
background information; identify any specific tests that might have been administered; 
review any test results; offer any diagnoses; or identify what goals were not met. 
 
Applicant also underwent individual psychotherapy with a clinical psychologist 
from January 2009 until December 2012.21 Although Applicant was denied access to his 
records (to furnish to DOHA) by the director of the center because the specific release 
submitted did not comply with provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) as well as other legal issues which had arisen since 
the healthcare provider had apparently abandoned the records upon her departure from 
the practice, several diagnoses did appear in other documentation released to him. 
Those diagnoses, apparently under an unspecified version of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) were as follows: 296.31–major depressive 
disorder, recurrent, mild; 300.01–panic disorder without agoraphobia; 300.02– 
generalized anxiety disorder; and 300.3–obsessive-compulsive disorder.22 None of the 
diagnoses were alcohol-related disorders. 
 
As noted above, on October 9, 2014, Applicant underwent a psychological 
evaluation with another clinical psychologist at the behest of the DOD CAF. Applicant 
underwent a clinical interview, and he was administered the Mini Mental Status 
Examination (MMSE),23 the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory–2 (MMPI-2),24 
and the Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory–3 (SASSI-3).25 Based on the 
clinical interview and the test results, the psychologist opined that Applicant’s MMSE 
results (30 points out of a maximum 30 points) reflected “very minimal cognitive 
impairment;”26 the MMPI-2 results reflected scale 2 depression: Applicant feels 
somewhat inadequate personally and possibly has some low self-worth; tends to view 
the future with uncertainty and a degree of pessimism; worries excessively; is sensitive, 
especially to criticism; is currently not so satisfied with his life; may be reacting to stress 
by internalizing it inward to a depression; and there is “the possibility of [alcohol 
dependence”;27 and the SASSI-3 reflected “a high probability” for substance 
                                                          
21
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 24. 
 
22
 Item 7 (Therapy Records, dated May 30, 2014), at 3. 
 
23
 The MMSE, incorrectly identified by the clinical psychologist as the Mini Mental State Evaluation, is an 
effective screening tool for cognitive impairment with older adults. It is an 11-question measure that tests five areas of 
cognitive function: orientation, registration, attention and calculation, recall, and language. The maximum score is 30. 
 
24
 The MMPI-2 is designed to provide relevant information to speed diagnosis and psychiatric treatment 
planning for psychiatric patients as well as a range of assessments in the evaluation of disorders such as post-
traumatic stress disorder, clinical depression; identification of suitable candidates for high-risk public safety positions 
(nuclear power plant workers, police officers, airline pilots, etc.); and the evaluation of participants in substance abuse 
programs. It consists of 567 true-false questions. There are ten trait scales available. 
 
25
 The SASSI-3 is a screening measure designed to assist in the identification of individuals who have a high 
probability of having a substance dependence disorder. It consists of 93 questions. 
 
26
 Item 9, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
27
 Item 9, supra note 11, at 3. The clinical psychologist also speculated that Applicant “may be indeed self-
medicating his symptoms with alcohol,” but there is no evidence to support that suggestion. Applicant did, however, 
confirm that he never felt comfortable taking anti-anxiety or anti-depressant medication. See Item 5, supra note 3, at 
5. 
 
6 
                                      
 
dependence; Applicant admitted to alcohol dependence; he is “in very early remission 
albeit not in full remission at this point;” he is still vulnerable to relapse; and “he wants 
very much to remain abstinent now.”28  
 
The clinical psychologist submitted the following diagnostic impressions under an 
unspecified version of the DSM: Axis I: 300.4-dysthymic disorder; rule out 296.31-major 
depressive disorder, recurrent, mild; 300.02-generalized anxiety disorder; 303.90-
alcohol dependence in early full remission; Axis II: rule out dependent and avoidant 
personality traits; Axis III: situs inversus reported;29 Axis IV: alcohol dependence, 
relational, past legal (DUIs), medical, depression/anxiety; Axis V: GAF=60.30 The most 
significant diagnosis was 303.90-alcohol dependence with the remission specifier “in 
early full remission.”31   
 
In addition to the diagnostic impressions, the clinical psychologist set forth a 
discussion in a question and answer format based upon his observations, the most 
relevant of which are essentially as follows:  
 
 If Applicant can get his alcohol issues under control and clinically work on his 
depression, anxiety and stress issues, he can probably be a reliable, consistent, 
and even trustworthy employee. I believe he is on target to do this. However, 
counseling for these issues is recommended, especially for his alcohol problem; 
 
 If Applicant takes recovery and treatment seriously, he will likely be successful 
and his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness should improve as well as not 
be in question; 
 
 Applicant has had treatment in the past for his alcohol and anxiety issues. His 
prognosis for alleviating the depression and anxiety issues are good. He is in the 
early phase of recovery. He should continue in AA, obtain a sponsor, and attend 
groups and individual counseling. He should continue his previous course of 
treatment by other mental health and substance abuse professionals.32 
                                                          
 
28
 Item 9, supra note 11, at 2-3. 
 
29
 Situs inversus is a genetic condition that causes the organs in the chest and abdomen to be positioned in 
a mirror image from their normal positions. 
 
30
 A multiaxial system was developed which involves an assessment on several axes, each of which refers 
to a different domain of information that may help the clinician plan treatment and predict outcome. There are five 
such axes in the DSM-IV multiaxial classification: Axis I: clinical disorders & other conditions that may be a focus of 
clinical attention; Axis II: personality disorders & mental retardation; Axis III: general medical conditions; Axis IV: 
psychosocial and environmental problems; and Axis V: global assessment of functioning. Item 9, supra note 11, at 3. 
 
31
 The remission specifier “early full remission” is used if, for at least 1 month, but for less than 12 months, 
no criteria (incidents) for alcohol dependence have been met. The remission specifier “sustained full remission” is 
used if none of the criteria for dependence have been met at any time during a period of 12 months or longer. See 
DSM-IV-TR at 195-196. 
 
32
 Item 9, supra note 11, at 4. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 
The clinical psychologist’s report summarized as follows: Applicant would be suitable for 
a security clearance providing he sustains consistent treatment around his mental 
health and substance dependency; his prognosis for recovery is good and his reliability 
and trustworthiness would improve; and if he complies with therapy, substance abuse, 
and AA treatment, clinically he would be a very stable employee.33  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”34 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”35   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”36 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
                                                          
33
 Item 9, supra note 11, at 5. 
 
34
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
35
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
36
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.37  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”38 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”39 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
                                                          
37
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
38
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
39
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
9 
                                      
 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” may apply under 
AG ¶ 22(c).  Similarly, a “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence” 
is of security significance under AG ¶ 22(d). An “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program” is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 22(e). Additionally, 
“relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol 
rehabilitation program” is also of security significance.  
 
AG ¶ 22(a) has been established by Applicant’s alcohol-related arrests and 
convictions in 2000 and 2003; AG ¶ 22(c) has been established, because Applicant 
repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication over a lengthy period; and AG 
¶ 22(d) has been established by the alcohol dependence diagnosis made by the clinical 
psychologist in October 2014. AG ¶ 22(e) has not been established as the record is 
silent regarding any diagnosis made by the LSW with whom Applicant met from 2003 
until 2005; and AG ¶ 22(f) has not been established by any reported relapse following 
the October 2014 diagnosis of alcohol dependence, the only time such a professional, 
as opposed to a self-diagnosis, of alcohol dependence was made.  
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 23(b), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where 
“the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides 
evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of 
abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” Likewise, 
AG ¶ 23(c) may apply if “the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and 
is making satisfactory progress.” Similarly, AG ¶ 23(d) applies where the evidence 
shows: 
 
the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), 23(c), and 23(d) all partially apply. There is no evidence that 
Applicant ever appeared intoxicated or impaired at work. The only alcohol-related 
“incidents” involving police authorities and judicial authorities were the ones in March 
2000 (DUI), September 2003 (public indecency), and November 2003 (DUI) with the 
most recent such incident now over 12 years ago. While Applicant acknowledges his 
 
10 
                                      
 
alcohol dependency, and he experienced several self-described relapses over the 
years, those relapses did not involve driving. With the exception of those incidents, he 
has never had any other involvement with law enforcement or judicial authorities even 
remotely related to his alcohol consumption. Applicant completed the court-mandated 
alcohol-program attendance, and participated in a three-day course on drinking and 
driving in 2000, alcohol counseling in 2003, AA meetings over a period of years, alcohol 
and mental health counseling from 2003 until 2005, and individual psychotherapy from 
2009 until 2012. There is no evidence in the record that he was ever advised to abstain 
from using alcohol. There is no evidence that Applicant was prescribed medication to 
treat his alcohol dependency. Also, there is unsupported speculation that Applicant was 
self-medicating his non-alcohol-related conditions with alcohol. Applicant acknowledged 
that it was initially difficult for him to admit to himself and to others that he had relapsed. 
He also admitted that there are times when he feels anxious, but that he knows that 
taking a drink does not assuage that anxiety. He knows he needs to be vigilant and on-
guard when it comes to alcohol. If he feels a craving or is uncomfortable, he reaches out 
to another sober individual for help. Those earlier urges have subsided since he started 
working on the 12-step program with his sponsor.  
 
Now abstinent since June 2014 – 6 months before the SOR was issued and 18 
months ago – Applicant’s updated diagnosis should be changed to read alcohol 
dependence in “sustained full remission,” since none of the criteria for dependence 
have been met at any time during a period of 12 months or longer. Applicant has taken 
full responsibility for his actions. He accepted the information and mastered the coping 
skills developed in his various education and therapy programs, and he is now aware of 
the negative effects of consuming alcohol. The most recent clinical discussion of 
Applicant’s issues was submitted in October 2014. It was said that Applicant would be 
suitable for a security clearance providing he sustains consistent treatment around his 
mental health and substance dependency. His prognosis for recovery is good and his 
reliability and trustworthiness would improve. If he complies with therapy, substance 
abuse, and AA treatment, clinically he would be a very stable employee. Applicant 
chose to work with AA without any further mental health treatment. Nevertheless, his 
condition has continued to improve, and I conclude that his alcohol problem is now 
actually alcohol dependence in “sustained full remission” and will not recur. His 
relationship with alcohol no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Psychological Conditions is set 
forth in AG ¶ 27: 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
 
11 
                                      
 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 28(a), “behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but not limited to 
emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, or bizarre 
behavior”, may raise security concerns. If there is “an opinion by a duly qualified mental 
health professional that the individual has a condition not covered under any other 
guideline that may impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness,” AG ¶ 28(b) may 
apply. Similarly, where “the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take prescribed 
medication,” AG ¶ 28(c) might apply.  
 
There have been two sets of diagnoses: In December 2012, they were as 
follows: 296.31–major depressive disorder, recurrent, mild; 300.01–panic disorder 
without agoraphobia; 300.02–generalized anxiety disorder; and 300.3–obsessive-
compulsive disorder. While it does not appear that those conditions are covered under 
any other guideline, none of the diagnoses were alcohol-related disorders. Moreover, 
there is no documented analysis by the clinical psychologist that any of the diagnosed 
conditions refer to “emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, 
or bizarre behavior” that might cast doubt on Applicant’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness. In October 2014, the other diagnoses were Axis I: 300.4-dysthymic 
disorder; rule out 296.31-major depressive disorder, recurrent, mild; 300.02-generalized 
anxiety disorder; 303.90-alcohol dependence in early full remission; Axis II: rule out 
dependent and avoidant personality traits; Axis III: situs inversus reported; Axis IV: 
alcohol dependence, relational, past legal (DUIs), medical, depression/anxiety; Axis V: 
GAF=60. The focus was on alcohol dependence in early full remission, clearly a 
condition that is covered under Guideline G. Furthermore, the clinical psychologist 
noted that Applicant would be suitable for a security clearance providing he sustains 
consistent treatment around his mental health and substance dependency. His 
prognosis for recovery is good and his reliability and trustworthiness would improve. If 
he complies with therapy, substance abuse, and AA treatment, clinically he would be a 
very stable employee. 
The SOR seems to focus on a non-issue in the 2014 diagnoses that supposedly 
increases Applicant’s risk of self-medicating with alcohol, and that the self-medication 
increases his relapse into alcohol use, the combination of which impairs his judgment, 
reliability or trustworthiness. The position is without merit. The issue of self-medication 
was based on mere speculation, without any evidence in the psychological evaluation 
to support it. The SOR does acknowledge that Applicant’s mental health prognoses are 
good so long as he continues with psychotherapy treatment and with substance abuse 
treatment. Department Counsel rejected Applicant’s voluntary attendance at AA 
meetings asserting that they do not comply with the “recommendation” by the clinical 
psychologist calling for a “structured, consistent treatment.” What is missing from that 
analysis is that the recommendation appears in an evaluation from an individual 
 
12 
                                      
 
selected by the DOD CAF to perform merely a psychological evaluation. It is not from a 
treating physician who has a continuing professional relationship, not merely a one-day 
series of tests and a brief interview. AG ¶¶ 28(a) and 28(c) have not been established, 
and AG ¶ 28(b) has been minimally established. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from psychological conditions. If “the identified condition is readily 
controllable with treatment, and the individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent 
compliance with the treatment plan,” AG ¶ 29(a) might apply. Under AG ¶ 29(b), it is 
potentially mitigating where “the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or 
treatment program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified mental health professional.” If there is a “recent opinion by a duly qualified 
mental health professional employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. 
Government that an individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and 
has a low probability of recurrence or exacerbation,” AG ¶ 29(c) may apply. In addition, 
AG ¶ 29(e) may apply if “there is no indication of a current problem.” 
AG ¶¶ 29(a), 29(b), and 29(c) partially apply, and AG ¶ 29(e) applies. Applicant’s 
most recent alcohol-related incident involving police authorities and judicial authorities 
occurred in November 2003, over 12 years ago. There is no evidence that his other 
conditions have caused him to be emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, 
violent, paranoid, or to exhibit bizarre behavior. He was given various diagnoses by 
clinical psychologists in 2012 and 2014. He attended various educational sessions, 
underwent alcohol counseling as well as alcohol and mental health therapy, and 
received individual psychotherapy for several years. While he may have experienced 
periodic self-described alcohol relapses, there is no evidence that any of his other 
diagnosed conditions was not readily controllable with therapy or simply over time 
without therapy. Applicant’s treating clinical psychologist failed to memorialize a 
treatment plan and made no recommendations. The evaluating clinical psychologist did 
not prescribe a particular specific treatment plan, but he clearly noted that Applicant 
would be suitable for a security clearance providing he sustains consistent treatment 
around his mental health and substance dependency. Applicant’s prognosis for 
recovery was considered good and his reliability and trustworthiness would be expected 
to improve. If Applicant complies with therapy, substance abuse, and AA treatment, 
clinically he would be a very stable employee. Applicant chose to embrace AA and its 
12-step program, and he has managed to avoid alcohol for 18 months without relapse 
or other negative incidents. His 2014 diagnosis of alcohol dependence in early full 
remission under the DSM should be updated to alcohol dependence in sustained full 
remission. There is no evidence of a continuing or current problem. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
13 
                                      
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and E in my analysis below.      
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct and conditions. 
His relationship with alcohol resulted in three alcohol-related incidents involving police 
authorities and judicial authorities. He spent time in jail, paid fines, and was required to 
attend education classes, and alcohol counseling. Nevertheless, he continued to 
consume alcohol. After lengthy periods of sobriety, he experienced a number of self-
described relapses.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has not been involved in any alcohol-related criminal conduct since 2003. 
There is no evidence of security violations or alcohol consumption at work. On those 
occasions when he was involved in the three alcohol-related incidents, he has complied 
with the various mandates of the courts. Applicant acknowledged that it was initially 
difficult for him to admit to himself and to others that he had relapsed. He finally 
acknowledged that alcohol may have had a negative impact on his education and 
employment.  He admitted that there are times when he feels anxious, but he now 
knows that taking a drink will not assuage that anxiety. Applicant knows he needs to be 
vigilant and on-guard when it comes to alcohol. His earlier urges for alcohol have 
subsided since he started working on the 12-step program with his sponsor. He has 
been abstinent since June 2014, a period of over 18 months. 
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.40 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the alcohol consumption and personal conduct security 
concerns. Nevertheless, this decision should serve as a warning that Applicant’s failure 
                                                          
40
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
to remain abstinent will adversely affect his future eligibility for a security 
clearance.41(See AG && 2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated and overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline I:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
41
 While this decision should serve as a warning to Applicant as security officials may continue to monitor his 
finances, this decision, including the warning, should not be interpreted as a conditional eligibility to hold a security 
clearance. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) has no authority to attach limiting conditions to an 
applicant’s security clearance. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 06-26686 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2008); ISCR 
Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-04302 at 5 (App. Bd. June 30, 2005); ISCR 
Case No. 03-17410 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0109 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). 
 
