KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST:   Applicant received notice sufficient to apprise a reasonable person as to the kind of
evidence that might mitigate the concerns arising from his delinquent debts and of his
responsibility to provide such evidence. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like
lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the
Directive.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-01702.a1
DATE: 12/23/2015
DATE: December 23, 2015
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01702
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
1Applicant did submit one document, although it was a copy of one that he had previously submitted in his
Answer to the SOR.  
2
The Department of Defense (D0D) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
June 16, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On October 13, 2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor for about 5 years.  He stated that his financial
problems were due to a drop in income while he was attending school.  He also states that he is
“making ‘better financial decisions.’” Decision at 3.  In 2013, he hired a law firm to assist him in
resolving his debts and improving his credit rating.  He provided no documentation confirming that
the firm had resolved any of his debts.  He did not provide a budget setting forth his income,
expenses, and discretionary income.
Applicant’s SOR lists a bankruptcy and 11 delinquent debts from between 2007 and 2013.
The debts were for a credit card, an automobile repossession, rent, cable services, etc.  The Judge
found that two debts–the credit card and another debt owed to a bank–had been resolved.  She found
that the remainder of Applicant’s debts had not been resolved.  Despite Applicant’s claims that he
had not filed for bankruptcy, the Judge found that he had done so in 2010, based on the contents of
a credit report.
In the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Department Counsel stated that the information
that Applicant had previously submitted in his Answer to the SOR was not sufficient to mitigate the
security concerns in his case.  Department Counsel stated that a debt having dropped off a credit
report due to age was not proof of debt resolution.  Applicant submitted no additional documents
in response to the FORM.1  Applicant stated that he had received credit counseling through the law
firm he had hired.  He submitted not evidence of his job performance, duties, character, etc.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge entered favorable findings for the two debts that she found to have been resolved.
For the remainder of the SOR allegations, however, she found adversely to Applicant.  She stated
3
that Applicant had not provided sufficient documentation to corroborate his claims of debt
resolution.  She also concluded that Applicant had not shown that his financial problems arose from
circumstances outside his control.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge reiterated that Applicant
had not provided evidence that would support his contention that a number of his debts had been
resolved.  She stated that he appears to have relied on the fact that many of his debts have dropped
off his credit reports, which she stated was not credible evidence of debt resolution.
Discussion
Applicant’s appeal submission includes evidence from outside the record, much of which
post-dates the Decision.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Noting
the Judge’s statement that he had not provided a documentary response to the FORM, he states that
he “did not have a full understanding of the circumstances that would affect my current Security
Clearance Level[.]” We construe this as an argument that Applicant was not aware of his rights,
thereby impairing his receipt of due process.  
As the Judge stated in the Decision, however, Department Counsel put Applicant on notice
that the file as it then existed was not enough to mitigate the concerns arising from Applicant’s debt
problems.  Department Counsel also advised Applicant of his right to submit a documentary
response to the FORM “setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation,
as appropriate.”  FORM at 2.   DOHA sent the FORM to Applicant along with a cover letter, dated
June 10, 2015, that provided similar guidance.  Applicant also received a copy of the Directive,
which includes a detailed description of an applicant’s right to respond to the FORM.  Applicant
signed a receipt for the package that included the cover letter, FORM, and Directive.    
Applicant received notice sufficient to apprise a reasonable person as to the kind of evidence
that might mitigate the concerns arising from his delinquent debts and of his responsibility to
provide such evidence.  As the Judge noted, however, Applicant did not respond, save for one
document that was already in the record.  Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like
lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the
Directive.  Applicant was not denied reasonable notice of his rights and obligations and was not
denied the due process afforded by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 2-3 (App.
Bd. Jun. 30, 2014).  
Applicant’s brief cites to record evidence concerning, among other things,  his having hired
a law firm to help resolve this debts.  The Judge made findings about this.  However, her observation
that Applicant had provided no evidence to show what this firm may have done is consistent with
the record.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.
 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06359 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 6, 2015). 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
4
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
