 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05513   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Justin Holbrook, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the drug 
involvement concerns related to his one-time marijuana use in July 2013, his past 
practice of gifting marijuana to his friends on a few occasions between 2011 and 2013, 
and his ongoing association with his parents who legally use, grow, and distribute 
marijuana under the laws of their state of residency. He has demonstrated an intent not 
to use or distribute drugs in the future. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the drug involvement guideline.1 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or 
deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on August 12, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted AE E through F, which were also admitted without objection.3 I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on August 21, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 25, is a software engineer. A gifted student, Applicant graduated from 
college at 20 years old and began his professional career. After graduation, he worked 
for his alma mater before accepting a software developer position at a technology 
company located in the same town. Applicant began working for a federal contractor in 
August 2013. Before starting this position, he did not know about security clearances 
and had not previously anticipated having access to classified information. On his 
security clearance application, dated February 2014, Applicant disclosed one-time 
marijuana use in July 2013. He also disclosed that on four to six occasions between 
2011 and 2013 that he gave marijuana as gifts to friends. The ensuing investigation also 
revealed that Applicant’s parents legally use medicinal marijuana and operate a medical 
marijuana dispensary.4 
 
Medical marijuana became legal in Applicant’s home state in 1999. Growing up, 
Applicant’s mother discouraged him from all use of drugs. When Applicant was in 
college, his mother, who has long suffered chronic pain, discussed with him the 
possibility of her using medicinal marijuana. It was important to her, given the policy she 
adopted while raising Applicant, that he did not object. Applicant’s mother received a 
license to use medicinal marijuana in 2009. His stepfather received a license for 
medical marijuana shortly thereafter. In 2010, Applicant’s parents received their license 
to operate a medical marijuana dispensary, which they operate on the grounds of their 
home.5  
 
 Between 2011 and 2013, Applicant admits that he gifted marijuana mostly in the 
form of comestibles to friends. He took the marijuana from his parent’s dispensary. He 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 The pre-hearing order issued to the parties and the Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 
2014, are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE IV.  
 
4 Tr. 24-27, 56, 62-63; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 32-34, 44-47. 
 
3 
 
did not ask permission to do so, but they were aware of his actions. Although his friends 
would oftentimes use the marijuana in his presence, Applicant did not partake. In July 
2013, while between jobs, Applicant decided to try marijuana. He smoked the drug at 
his parent’s home, an environment where he felt safe, using a vaporizer. He also ate 
half of a marijuana brownie. Afterward, Applicant realized he did not particularly care for 
the effects of marijuana. He decided that further use of marijuana was incompatible with 
his personal goals. Under the terms of his parents’ marijuana licenses, Applicant knows 
that his use of marijuana, medical or recreational, and his distribution of the drug was 
illegal under his state’s laws at the time.6 
  
 Applicant moved to another state when he began his current position. Other than 
his parents, he does not knowingly associate with people who use marijuana or other 
drugs. Applicant’s employer has a drug-free policy, which Applicant respects and 
abides. In 2015, Applicant received a low-level security clearance from another 
government agency.7 Now a clearance holder, Applicant understands the strict 
prohibition against any use of illegal drugs. He has not used marijuana since July 2013 
and has no plans to use it in the future. Applicant has submitted a signed statement of 
intent to that effect.8 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
6 Tr. 31, 34-36, 40, 47-58, 63-66; GE 2. 
 
7 Both parties agree there is no reciprocity issue raised in this adjudication. The position of the parties 
regarding the issue is appended to the record as HE III.  
 
8 Tr. 30, 40-43, 53, 55-56, 58-62, 67-71; GE E-F. 
 
4 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Use of an illegal drug raises concerns about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.9 Applicant admitted disqualifying conduct 
under the drug involvement guideline; specifically, using marijuana in July 2013 and 
illegal drug possession and distribution effected by gifting marijuana to his friends on 
several occasions between 2011 and 2013.  Also of concern is Applicant’s relationship 
with his parents who use, grow, and sell marijuana.10 Given the federal prohibition on 
these activities, it is appropriate to examine whether this association adversely impacts 
Applicant’s security worthiness. I find that it does not. Applicant has submitted sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the drug involvement concerns in the SOR.  
 
Applicant’s one-time use of marijuana was experimental and not indicative of 
habits or behaviors that indicate an inability to property handle or safeguard classified 
information. His past acts of gifting marijuana to friends were those of an immature 
young man, trying to fit in with his older peers. At hearing, Applicant appeared more 
self-possessed and confident. It is unlikely that he will seek validation from his peers in 
a similar manner in the future.11 While Applicant is not expected to terminate his 
relationship with his parents, this relationship will continue to expose Applicant to 
activities illegal under federal law, though they are legal under the laws of state where 
Applicant’s parents reside. However, I find that this relationship does not reflect 
negatively on Applicant’s security worthiness. Applicant now lives in an environment 
with strict prohibitions on any drug use. He appreciates the differences between the 
environment in which he grew up and the one he inhabits now as an employee of a 
federal contractor. He understands the permissive attitude of the former is not 
appropriate in the latter. Applicant has also submitted a signed, statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation.12  
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s judgment and 
trustworthiness. I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Throughout 
this adjudication, Applicant has openly discussed his history with marijuana, including 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 24. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). 
 
11 AG ¶ 26(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 26(b).  
 
5 
 
revealing adverse information despite the potential consequences to himself or his 
family members. His ability to provide full, frank, and candid answers is an indication 
that Applicant understands the gravity of the fiduciary relationship he seeks to enter into 
with the Government. He also demonstrated that he understands the restrictions on 
personal behaviors attendant to the privilege of having access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
