 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01819 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On June 30, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
On July 28, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated March 30, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated April 22, 
2015. Applicant received the FORM on April 28, 2015. He was afforded 30 days to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely 
submitted additional information after receipt of the FORM, which was received without 
objection from Department Counsel.1 On August 12, 2015, DOHA assigned the case to 
me. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning relating 
to South Korea. Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and 
context for these facts. Applicant did not object, and I took administrative notice of all of 
the facts in all of the documents. See the South Korea sections of the Findings of Fact 
of this decision, infra. (FORM: Items 5 – 10) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings, is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. (Item 2) His SOR 
answers are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old staff software and computer engineer employed by a 
defense contractor since March 2008. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. (Item 3) 
  
Applicant was born and raised in South Korea. He received the majority of his 
education in South Korea to include his high school diploma in March 1990, his 
bachelor’s degree in March 1997, and his master’s degree in March 1999. Applicant 
served his mandatory military service in the South Korean Air Force from January 1992 
to July 1994, and was discharged as a staff sergeant. (Item 3, Item 4) 
                                                          
1
Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as “FORM response.” 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant entered the United States in September 2002 and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2012. He received his most recent U.S. passport 
in February 2013. Applicant attended graduate school in the United States from 
September 2002 to March 2008 and was awarded a doctorate degree in January 2008. 
He remained in graduate school for a short time after receiving his degree to complete 
pending research. (Item 3, Item 4)  
 
Applicant married his wife, a South Korean national, in South Korea in August 
2002. His wife is employed at a U.S. hospital as a registered nurse.  Applicant has an 
eight-year-old son and a five-year-old daughter. Both children were born in the United 
States and are U.S. citizens by birth. (Item 3, Item 4) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 A number of factors were developed during Applicant’s background investigation 
raising security concerns under this Guideline. As noted Applicant’s wife is a citizen of 
South Korea. Her current status in the United States is lawful permanent resident alien. 
(Item 2, Item 3) Applicant’s two minor children are dual citizens of the United States and 
South Korea. His children acquired their South Korean citizenship through their parents 
at birth. When Applicant’s children reach the age of 18, they will have the option of 
renouncing or retaining their South Korean citizenship. (Item 2, Item 3) 
 
 By virtue of Applicant’s children holding South Korean citizenship, they are 
eligible to receive about $90 per month per child as an educational stipend from the 
South Korean government until age five. Applicant’s children were receiving this stipend 
at the time he submitted his SF-86, but Applicant “has not made any efforts to maintain 
[his] children’s South Korean citizenship to make them eligible to receive the stipend.” 
Applicant’s son has not received his stipend since November 2013. (Item 2, Item 3) 
 
 Applicant has a number of relatives who are citizens and residents of South 
Korea to include his mother and father, his two sisters, his mother-in-law and his father-
in-law, his brother-in-law, and his nephew. His mother is a homemaker and his father is 
a retired commercial engineer. One of his sister’s is a school cafeteria worker and the 
other sister is unemployed, but was previously employed by the telephone company. 
His mother-in-law is a homemaker and father-in-law is a retired train station worker. 
(Item 2, Item 3, Item 4) The FORM does not contain information regarding the 
occupations of his brother-in-law or his nephew. 
 
Applicant provides approximately $2,000 annually to both his father and father-in-
law. He described this money as gifts versus support to commemorate major family 
events such as birthdays or seasonal events. Applicant sends this money in increments 
about four to five times during the year. (Item 2, Item 3) 
 
Applicant’s wife has maintained a bank account since 2008 in South Korea for 
the purpose of being able to conveniently wire money to their parents. (Item 4) Applicant 
traveled to South Korea in November 2008 and in March and April 2013 for the purpose 
of visiting family. (Item 2, Item 3, Item 4) The FORM did not develop facts showing 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s connections to the United States other than those discussed supra. Nor did 
the FORM contain any character references or employment information. Applicant 
stated in his FORM response that he would be “more than happy to take actions to 
remove any adversities shown on the statement of reasons.” He added, “Whether I will 
have a security clearance or not, United States of America is my country and my 
children’s country. I am proud of working for [defense contractor] supporting national 
security and our international partners.” (FORM response) 
 
South Korea2 
 
South Korea is currently a stable, democratic republic. The United States and 
South Korea have been close allies since 1950, and have fought communism on the 
Korean peninsula and in Vietnam. The United States, since 1950 and currently, has 
thousands of U.S. military personnel stationed in South Korea, and frequently conducts 
joint military operations with South Korea. About 2.3 million Koreans live in the United 
States. The United States has promised over the next four years to provide $11 billion in 
force enhancements in Korea. South Korea is the United States’ seventh largest trading 
partner. The recently signed free trade agreement between the United States and South 
Korea will generate billions of dollars in additional economic growth and job creation in 
both countries.     
 
The South Korean government generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens. Criminals violate the human rights of some South Korean citizens. South Korea 
has some political prisoners, and some rules regarding arrest and detention are vague. 
 
South Korea does not recognize dual citizenship. There have been 
circumstances where U.S. citizens with connections to South Korea were drafted into 
the South Korean army.  
 
In recent years, the United States and South Korea have differed in their 
diplomatic approaches towards North Korea. The United States’ position is more 
assertive in its attempts to curtail North Korea’s development of advanced military 
technology, such as ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons. South Korea has 
emphasized steps towards unification of North and South Korea. 
 
Industrial espionage includes seeking commercial secrets. South Korea has a 
history of collecting protected U.S. information. In 2000, South Korea was listed as one 
of the seven most active countries engaged in foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage against the United States. In 1997, Lockheed Martin was fined for unlicensed 
export to South Korea and that same year a civilian employee of the U.S. Navy passed 
classified documents to the South Korean naval attaché to the United States. On 
                                                          
2
The facts in the section concerning South Korea are from Department Counsel’s factual 
summary, except for some comments in the first paragraph about the relationship between the United 
States and South Korea, which are from the U.S. Department of State, Background Note: South Korea, 
Oct. 2008 and U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Republic of Korea, January 2, 
2009. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
multiple occasions, South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of sensitive 
technology, in violation of U.S. export control laws.          
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
  
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s wife, children, parents, siblings, and in-laws are citizens of South 
Korea. All except his spouse and children reside in South Korea. Applicant has regular 
and non-casual contact with his family members in South Korea. Applicant’s children 
have received educational benefits from South Korea. Information regarding details and 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
nature of employment for some of Applicant’s relatives living in South Korea was not 
developed in the FORM.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has close contact with that relative, this factor alone 
is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
  The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of South Korea with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship 
with his family living in South Korea, as well as South Korean government and 
diplomatic officials, do not pose a security risk.  
 
  Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to 
choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist family members.3 
South Korea was listed as one of the seven most active countries engaged in foreign 
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States. On multiple 
occasions, South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of technology controlled 
under U.S. export control laws. It is conceivable that Applicant might be targeted 
through a family member in an attempt to gather information from the United States. As 
noted, information regarding the occupation of several of Applicant’s family members 
was not developed. 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from South Korea seek or 
have sought classified or economic information Applicant, nevertheless, his relationship 
with his relatives whose occupations were not developed or unknown creates a 
potential conflict of interest because his relationship with his family is sufficiently close 
to raise a security concern about his desire to assist those family members by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s contacts with his family members to raise the issue of potential foreign 
                                                          
3
 An applicant with relatives in Iran, for example, has a much heavier burden to overcome than an 
applicant with relatives living in South Korea. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) 
(stating an applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when 
parents and siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(articulating “very heavy burden” standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran); ISCR 
Case No. 07-12471 at 9 (A.J. May 30, 2008) (listing numerous recent cases involving U.S. citizens with 
Iranian connections whose clearances were denied, and citing no recent cases where the Appeal Board 
affirmed the grant of a clearance for someone with immediate family members living in Iran). 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry 
is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
None of the foreign influence mitigating conditions fully apply. South Korea’s 
extensive history of collection activities creates a significant burden for Applicant to 
demonstrate that his family members are not subject to coercion or influence by the 
government of South Korea or business entities in South Korea. Applicant has frequent 
contact with his family members in South Korea, and there is a presumption that he has 
a non-casual relationship with his immediate family members including his in-laws.  
 
Also, there is no information in the FORM as to whether Applicant’s wife has any 
siblings or other family members in South Korea. Given the limited information 
contained in the FORM, Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to overcome the 
significant burden in mitigation. The ultimate burden rests with the Applicant who has 
the burden of demonstrating evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation sufficient 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to overcome the prima facie case against him. Applicant must demonstrate that no 
conflict exists. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning South Korea must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in South Korea, as well as the dangers existing in South Korea.4 
South Korea is a known collector of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic 
information; however, South Korea has been a close military ally of the United States 
since the Korean war began in 1950. South Korea and the United States have close 
relationships in diplomacy and trade. About 2.3 million Koreans live in the United States.      
 
Applicant’s frequent communications and visits with his family establish his ties of 
affection to his family. South Korea has a history of targeting U.S. industries for 
sensitive information and firms have engaged in export violations, sending sensitive, 
technologically advanced equipment to South Korea and other economic espionage. 
There is some possibility that Applicant could be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the United States. It is possible that South Korean intelligence 
agents or those conducting industrial espionage could attempt to pressure Applicant to 
gain some kind of advantage over Applicant to obtain classified or sensitive 
information.  
 
                                                          
4
 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
There is nothing in the FORM to suggest that Applicant is not a productive and 
law-abiding member of society. From the very limited information available in the 
FORM, he is a well-educated and valued employee, who is making a contribution to the 
national defense. However, the FORM lacks information regarding some of the 
occupations of Applicant’s relatives in South Korea, his connections to the United 
States, or detailed  information regarding his employment. The process does not permit 
an administrative judge to speculate on such matters and must therefore make his or 
her decision on the facts contained in the record. 
 
After weighing the evidence of Applicant’s connections to South Korea and to the 
United States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has not carried his 
burden of mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.k:  Against Applicant 
       
      Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
5
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
