1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03727 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen Jon Moss, Esq.   
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. In 2004, Applicant, who was a 
physician’s assistant, was arrested and charged with Possession of Controlled 
Substance by Fraud, when he wrote pain medication prescriptions for his disabled 
brother. The charge was deferred for two years. He has mitigated the personal conduct 
security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On January 22, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing personal conduct 
security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On February 23, 
2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 27, 2015, I was 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
assigned the case. On June 17, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for a hearing to be convened on July 9, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 7 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
A-1 through A-6 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. On 
July 17, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he asserted he was charged with attempting 
to possess a controlled substance by fraud for which he paid a fine and did community 
service. He denied falsifying his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP). His admissions are incorporated as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old physician’s assistant who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2013 and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. He has a 
disabled brother. And he inappropriately continued to prescribe medication to his 
brother without authorization or approval of the attending physician. (SOR Answer, Ex. 
A-4) Applicant’s older brother, who had a history of alcohol and drug abuse, illegally 
wrote prescriptions on a stolen prescription pad and called in prescriptions to a 
pharmacy. (SOR Answer, Ex. A-4)  His older brother, who was living with Applicant, was 
a medical doctor who, in 2003, had his medical license suspended by the state medical 
board. (SOR Answer, Ex. 4, Tr. 34)  
 
 From November 1992 through November 1998, Applicant served in the Army 
National Guard and was honorably discharged as a corporal (E-4). In 2009, he served 
in Armenia. (Tr. 29) From May 2005 through August 2008, he served in Iraq and in 2011 
in Afghanistan. (Tr. 18, 29) He again served in Afghanistan starting in March 2013. (Tr. 
29) 
 
Applicant received a deferred sentence for possession of a schedule III/IV2 
controlled substance by fraud. (Ex. 2, A-2, A-5) Between February 2003 and January 
2004, 22 forged prescriptions were filled at a pharmacy. (Ex. 2) The forged prescriptions 
were on a prescription pad for a doctor for whom the Applicant had previously worked. 
 
 In Applicant’s April 2013 e-QIP, even though the question restricted the time 
period to the previous seven years3 he felt it important to fully disclose the issue. He 
stated that in March 2004, he was accused of writing false prescriptions at a pharmacy. 
(Ex. 1, Ex. A-6, Tr. 28, Tr. 36) He stated he had been prescribing medications for his 
disabled brother who did not have health insurance coverage.  
                                                          
2 The drugs involved were Ultram (Tramadol), a narcotic-like pain reliever; Norco, which contains an 
opioid pain medication used to relieve moderate to severe pain; and Hydrocodone, an opioid pain 
medication. (Exs. 4-7) 
 
3 Applicant would have had to reveal the information when asked on the e-QIP if he had ever been 
charged with a felony. 
3 
 
Applicant’s brother suffered a stroke and had significant cognitive impairment. 
(Ex. 16) When his brother was a university student, without health insurance, a gas 
room heater malfunctioned filling the apartment with carbon monoxide. (Tr. 31) His 
brother suffered brain damage caused by anoxia resulting in loss of cognitive thinking, 
short-term memory, and debilitating his left side, and causing pain. (Tr. 33) The 
supervising physician had authorized medication for one month, but Applicant continued 
the prescriptions for another nine or ten months. (Ex. 1, Ex. 2, Ex. A-6, Tr. 16) Since 
2005, his disabled brother has not needed pain medication. 
 
Applicant failed to control his prescription pad and his other brother used it to 
illegally obtain drugs. (Ex. 1, A-6) At the time, he was unaware his brother also used the 
same prescription pad to write prescriptions on five to seven occasions. (Tr. 33) 
Applicant has not spoken to this brother in ten years. (Tr. 40) 
 
Applicant pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor and adjudication was deferred 
for two years. (Ex. 1, Tr. 18) He paid a $1,500 fine and performed 100 hours of 
community service. He surrendered his medical license for one year and then requested 
reconsideration. (Tr. 37) He was recertified by the state medical board and has an 
active, unrestricted state license. (Ex. 1, A-6, Tr. 18) He is credentialed at three local 
hospitals. (Tr. 22, 38) 
 
 While in Iraq, Applicant had a telephonic interview concerning the 2004 incident. 
(Tr. 19, 38)  He disclosed that his older brother had a history of alcohol and drug abuse 
and had attempted to call in prescriptions for his own personal use. (Tr. 19) Applicant 
took full responsibility for the prescriptions written for his disabled brother occurring after 
the one month that had been authorized by the attending physician. (Tr. 19) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government has an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse 
information about an applicant before making a clearance decision.  The Government 
relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not 
when they perceive disclosure to be prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s 
willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some indication of his 
willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other security concerns in the 
future, something the government relies on to perform damage assessments and limit 
the compromise of classified information.   
 
5 
 
In 2003 and 2004, Applicant exceeded his authorization as a PA and wrote 
prescriptions for his brother. The narcotic drug prescription for pain reduction was 
authorized for one month by the attending physician, but Applicant continued to write 
prescriptions following the one month authorization. The pain medication was for his 
brother who had suffered a stroke. At the same time, without his knowledge, his other 
brother was also using the prescription pad to write unauthorized prescriptions or call in 
unauthorized prescriptions. This brother’s medical license had been suspended. The 
pertinent disqualifying conditions are AG ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of rule violations.” 
 
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment applies.  
 
The unauthorized prescription of pain medication is not a minor infraction. 
However, these events occurred more than ten years ago. The prescriptions were 
written for his brother who had suffered a stroke and did not have medical insurance. 
This constitutes a unique circumstance that is unlikely to recur. His PA medical license 
was restored after one year and he is currently credentialed with three hospitals. With 
the passage of time, actions by the state medical board, and his subsequent service as 
a contractor with the U.S. military in Iraq and Afghanistan, the conduct does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
In Applicant’s 2013 e-QIP, he indicated that in March 2004 he was accused of 
writing false and fictitious prescriptions at a pharmacy and explained he had been 
prescribing medications for his disabled brother who did not have health insurance 
coverage. The supervising physician had authorized medication for one month, but 
Applicant continued the prescriptions thereafter. He did not control the prescription pad 
and his other brother wrote additional fraudulent prescriptions. Applicant took 
responsibility his actions.  
 
The SOR alleged Applicant, in a July 2013 interview, said he had forged 
prescriptions for a controlled substance for his own use and took responsibility for the 
criminal action to protect his brother. However, there is no evidence of what was said 
except what Applicant testified to at the hearing. There is no summary of the interview. 
Applicant never said the drugs were for his own use or that he was attempting to protect 
his brother from prosecution. There is no evidence support the SOR 1.c allegation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has served in the Army 
National Guard and as a contract employee serving with the U.S. military in Iraq and 
Afghanistan.  Ten years ago, under unique circumstances, Applicant, as a physician’s 
assistant, continued writing prescriptions for his brother’s pain medication after the 
authorization period ended. His e-QIP responses were sufficiently detailed to put the 
government on notice of what occurred in 2004. He did not falsify his e-QIP or provide 
false information or misleading information during a July 2013 telephone interview.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
