The Government submitted six items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02067
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On March 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 22,
2015.  Applicant received the FORM on August 4, 2015. Applicant did not submit a1
response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations (1.a through
1.f) under Guideline F. He also provided explanations. 
Applicant is 34 years old. He has never married and has one child. He obtained
his GED in 2010. (Item 4) Since 2013, Applicant has been employed with his current
employer. He completed an application for a security clearance on October 9, 2013. 
Financial
The SOR alleges failure to file  state tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012,
and five collection accounts totaling approximately $4,466. (Item 5 and 6)  In his
security clearance application Applicant listed his failure to file the tax returns, but he
gave no specific reason. He noted that no payment had been made for the tax. (Item 3) 
As to SOR 1.a, Applicant attached an April 2014 invoice from a tax group for
$51. However, this document does not reflect that he filed his income tax returns for the
years in question. The document does not provide proof of the state tax filing. 
Applicant attributes the alleged debt in SOR 1.b for $3,184, which occurred in
2007, to a lay-off from his job. He did not have the funds to pay the account, and he
was evicted from his home. Applicant was unemployed from October 2007 to May
2008. While he was looking for a job, he was supported by his mother. (Item 4) He
stated in his 2013 subject interview that he never paid the account, but he believes that
it has been removed from his credit report and that he is not responsible for the
account. (Item 4)
As to the remaining collection accounts listed in SOR 1.c to SOR 1.f, Applicant
admitted that he was delinquent on the accounts. In his 2013 interview, he stated that
he would research the accounts so that he could pay them. He provided no evidence of
any payment plans or payments. He noted that he intends to pay his delinquent
accounts.  The record does not provide any information on financial counseling.
 Policies 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
4
Analysis.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt in the amount of approximately $4,466 and
he did not file his state tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012. His admissions and
credit reports confirm the delinquent debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) and FC DC AG ¶
19(g) (failure to file federal or state tax returns as required by law) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s debts remain
unpaid. He provided no information or documentation that he has made any payments
on the debts or filed the tax returns. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not
apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant was unemployed from October 2007 to May 2008. This may
have caused the delinquent debts, but he has been employed with his current
employer since 2013. He stated that there was no particular reason that he did not file
his state tax returns. He has not provided any evidence of payments made to any
accounts. He intends to pay his delinquent debts, but he has not shown any efforts to
repay by submitting documentation. He has not acted responsibly under the
circumstances. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. There is no evidence in the
record to support this mitigating condition. There is no information to show that he has
5
obtained recent financial counseling.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person
factors. Applicant is a 34-year-old man who is single and has one child. He has been
employed with his current employer since 2013. He was unemployed for a period of
time. He gave no reason for not filing his state income tax returns. He stated that he
intends to pay his delinquent debts. However, a promise to pay in the future is not
sufficient for mitigation. He provided an invoice from a tax group which did not show if
he filed his tax returns for the years in question.  He did not respond to the FORM to
supplement the record. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the
financial considerations security concerns. He has not met his burden of proof.
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-f: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
