 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-03841 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a military spouse and prospective employee of a Defense contractor, 
mitigated security concerns raised by his past financial issues. He left a well-paying job 
when his spouse received military orders transferring her overseas. He was unable to 
secure employment while overseas and was unable to pay the debts he had incurred 
before moving overseas. Upon returning to the United States, the three-year gap in 
employment resulting from the overseas move and the state of the economy hindered 
his ability to find a job. He submitted documentation of satisfying his largest outstanding 
debt, a $10,000 student loan account, and is addressing the remaining debts that he 
incurred while unemployed. His current financial situation does not raise concerns about 
his ability to handle and safeguard classified information. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing to establish his eligibility for access to classified information (Answer).  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
On June 18, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed to hearing. Applicant’s hearing was scheduled for 
and held on August 14, 2015. See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) II, scheduling correspondence.2  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw allegation 1.e and, without 
objection, the motion was granted. Transcript (Tr.) at 16-17. Department Counsel 
offered four exhibits (Ex. 1 – 4).3 Applicant testified and also offered four exhibits (Ex. A 
– D). He requested additional time post-hearing to supplement the record. I granted his 
request, and he timely submitted two additional exhibits (Ex. E and F).4 All exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing transcript was received on August 
20, 2015, and the record closed on September 4, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is married and is the father of two children. He is a prospective 
employee for a federal contractor and his wife is an officer in the U.S. military. At the 
time of the hearing, Applicant’s wife was deployed to a combat zone. During their 
marriage, she has deployed on at least one other occasion to a hostile environment in 
support of the U.S. mission overseas (Tr. at 26-27) 
 
 Applicant started experiencing financial trouble in 2008. Upon being 
commissioned as an officer, Applicant’s wife (who previously served in the enlisted 
ranks) received orders transferring her to an overseas military base. Before moving 
overseas with his wife, Applicant was working for a large hospital chain, earning an 
annual salary of between $50,000 and $55,000. He was paying his debts on time. While 
overseas, Applicant was unable to find a job other than low-paying jobs that were 
insufficient to cover the cost of child care needed for their then infant children. Applicant 
and his wife decided that he should stay home and care for the children. Applicant 
exhausted his savings trying to pay the debts he had incurred before moving overseas, 
but eventually fell behind on several accounts. (Tr. at 28-33, 61-63; Ex. 2) 
 
Applicant and his family returned to the United States after his wife completed 
her three-year overseas tour. Applicant found it difficult to find a job because 
prospective employers questioned the three-year gap in his employment history and the 
economy was still recovering from the 2008 recession. In 2012, once his children 
started school, Applicant was able to attain a job with a federal contractor. The job paid 
$18 an hour and was a significant distance from his home, resulting in high commuting 
cost. The next year, Applicant and several other employees were laid off when funding 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 Documents establishing that, at the time of the hearing, Applicant was being sponsored for a clearance 
are included in the record as Hx. I. See ISCR Case No. 05-04831 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2006), jurisdiction 
was lost before the start of the hearing when individual lost job that was sponsoring them for a clearance. 
 
3 Department Counsel’s exhibit list was remarked as Hx. IV. 
 
4 The Government’s position regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission was marked Hx. V. 
 
3 
 
levels for the projects they were working on were reduced. Over the past two years, 
Applicant has had several periods of unemployment totaling 9 to 12 months, 
interspersed with part-time work or temporary employment. His ability to secure full-time 
employment has been hampered by the needs of his family, because he remains the 
primary caretaker for his young children. Applicant has an offer from a Defense 
contractor, who is sponsoring him for a security clearance, for full-time work earning an 
annual salary of approximately $58,000. He submitted a security clearance application 
in December 2013, disclosing his past-due debts. (Tr. at 33-41, 71-72; Ex. 1 - 2) 
  
The SOR lists nine debts totaling approximately $15,000. The SOR debts are for 
a past-due student loan account (1.a), a vehicle account (1.f), credit cards (1.b – 1.d, 
and 1.g – 1.h), cable bill (1.i), and a medical debt (1.j). Applicant submitted 
documentation that he satisfied his past-due student loan account, totaling over 
$10,000. He was able to satisfy his student loan from the income he received from the 
part-time and temporary work assignments he was able to obtain over the past few 
years. (Tr. at 41-43; Ex. A) He also submitted documentation to corroborate his 
testimony of making monthly payments totaling over $500 towards satisfaction of the 
delinquent vehicle account. (Tr. at 51-54, 61-63; Ex. A; Ex. D)  
 
Applicant refuted a April 2015 credit report indicating that he has a $219 
collection account for an unpaid cable bill. When Applicant has called to address this 
debt with the creditor, representatives informed him that they have no record of an 
account in his name and then reroute his call to several different departments before 
hanging up. Applicant’s frustration in trying to resolve this debt to no avail was patently 
obvious at hearing, as his body language and tone of voice change dramatically as he 
testified. Applicant also refuted the alleged medical debt for $125, because it is an eight-
year old bill for his children’s medical care that is fully covered by his wife’s health 
insurance through the military. (Tr. at 56-59; Ex. 4) 
 
Applicant’s plan now that he has paid his student loan account is to reach out to 
his overdue creditors and establish payment plans to resolve his four remaining debts. 
(He established through his testimony and Ex. C that the credit card debts alleged in 
SOR 1.g and 1.h are for the same debt.) He provided documentation that he has kept in 
contact with these creditors and, at times, has been able to make some minimal 
payments on these accounts. He has reduced the balances owed on all four credit card 
accounts to their current level of less than $4,000. Applicant testified that he has not 
accumulated any other past-due debt, which was corroborated by the recent credit 
report. (Tr. at 43-51, 59-63; Ex. 4; Ex. B - C, Ex. E - F) 
 
Applicant maintains a strict family budget, decreasing expenses wherever 
possible. For instance, as the son of a parent who was a cook in the U.S. military, he 
regularly cooks meals at home for himself and his young children. He and his wife have 
never been late in paying their monthly mortgage payments on a home they have 
owned for nearly seven years. They also pay their other recurring monthly expenses on 
time. They have filed their tax returns and paid any taxes owed on time. (Tr. at 64-71) 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
An administrative judge must ensure that due process proceedings are 
conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges are 
required to make certain that an applicant “received fair notice of the issues raised, had 
a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and was not subjected to unfair 
surprise.” ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014)  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the paramount importance of protecting national security in all 
suitability determinations, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern 
arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.”). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
Applicant accrued delinquent debt when he moved overseas in support of his 
spouse’s military career. Subsequently, he suffered a lengthy period of unemployment 
and underemployment. Although Applicant has always been willing to pay his debts and 
submitted evidence that even under the financial strains of the past few years he paid 
some of his past-due debts, he was unable to pay all his debts. This record raises the 
financial considerations security concern. It also requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability . . . to satisfy debts;” and 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are a consequence of his selfless sacrifice in 
support of his wife, which allows her to meet her military obligations. When Applicant’s 
wife received orders reassigning her overseas, he left a well-paying job and moved with 
his family. He was unable to find a job and ended up becoming the primary caretaker of 
their children. After returning from overseas, the three-year gap in his employment 
history and the state of the economy hindered his ability to find a job. He was able to 
obtain part-time or temporary work, but he has never been able to secure stable 
 
6 
 
employment paying an equivalent amount to what he earned prior to the overseas move 
until now with the current job offer. AG 20(b) applies.  
 
 Notwithstanding significant periods of unemployment and underemployment, 
Applicant acted responsibly in addressing his financial situation. First, Applicant made 
certain not to incur any other debts beyond those he had acquired before moving 
overseas. He continues to manage his finances in a responsible manner. Second, with 
the income he received from the part-time work or temporary job assignments he has 
been able to obtain over the past few years, Applicant paid his student loan account. Of 
note, this was the largest of Applicant’s outstanding debts and he paid well over 
$10,000 to satisfy the debt. Third, after satisfying the student loan debt, Applicant 
reached out to his other creditors and started to address these debts. His plan is to pay 
the delinquent vehicle loan and then address the remaining debts. He has already paid 
$500 on the vehicle debt. He demonstrated a clear commitment (not just words or 
promises) to follow through with his plan to resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 
20(d) also apply. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present clear 
evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, 
to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of 
showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of clearance holders. 
See generally, ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). 
 
 Although Applicant still has some past-due debt, he has resolved the debts he 
could within his means. He also presented a reasonable plan and a commitment to 
address his remaining debts. Furthermore, he manages his finances in a responsible 
manner and can be entrusted to handle other obligations in a similar fashion. In short, 
Applicant met his burden of persuasion. See ISCR Case 14-00504 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2014), where Board reversed judge’s adverse decision because, despite the lack of 
clear evidence regarding the status of some of the SOR debts, the individual provided 
evidence of a track record of debt repayment, a plan to resolve their financial situation, 
and a demonstrated commitment to pay the remaining debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).5 I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been honest about his financial situation since the start of the security clearance 
                                                          
5 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
process. Furthermore, the support he has provided his spouse, which has allowed her 
to pursue her military career and, by extension, supported the efforts of the United 
States around the globe speaks favorably about his character. This favorable record 
evidence and Applicant’s responsible action in addressing his financial situation 
mitigates the financial considerations security concern.  
 
 A security clearance determination is not intended to punish a person for past 
conduct or circumstances. Instead, these decisions serve as predictive judgments about 
an individual’s security suitability, where the person’s past conduct is the best indicator 
of future behavior.6 Here, Applicant has demonstrated through his past conduct that he 
possesses the requisite good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to be entrusted 
with classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d and 1.f – 1.j:       For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:          Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013). See also, ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. 
Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are not an exact science, but rather predicative 
judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that person's past conduct and present 
circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529).  
