                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 14-06602
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 8, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on April 25, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On April 2, 2015, the Department
of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the
Department of Defense (DoD) could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 16, 2015, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on July 16, 2015.  A notice of hearing was issued on August 28,
2015, scheduling the hearing for September 15, 2015.  The Government offered six
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were received without
objection.  The Applicant presented four exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A
through D, which were admitted into evidence without objection.  She also testified on
her own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on October 6,
2015, to allow the Applicant to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant
2
submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, which was admitted without objection.  The
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on September 23, 2015.  Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 64 years old and married with children.  She has an Associate’s
degree from a community college.  She holds the position of Truck Driver for a
defense contractor.  She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with
this employment.   
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on
the basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following
findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at
risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admitted all of the allegations set forth in the SOR, except 1(a).,
under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit Reports of the
Applicant dated May 13, 2014; November 14, 2014; July 1, 2015; and September 24,
2015, reflect that at one time Applicant was indebted to each of the creditors set forth
in the SOR, in an amount totaling approximately $29,000.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4,
5 and 6.)  Applicant began working for her current employer in April 2014.  She is
currently on a leave of absence pending this decision.  
   
The Government alleges that a Federal tax lien was entered against the
Applicant in 2008 in the amount of approximately $28,927.  Applicant contends that
this is a mistake, and that there is no valid federal tax lien against her or her
properties.  She notes that the social security numbers are wrong, and so are the
middle initials of the parties.  Applicant adds that she has always filed her income tax
returns and paid her taxes.  Applicant contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
and they actively researched the matter.  According to the documentation from the
IRS, it was determined that the lien in question is not the Applicant’s lien.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit A, and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit)
Applicant explained that she owned three separate houses, consisting of a
primary residence and two rentals.  Each house had a first and second mortgage.
Applicant claims that the second mortgages were held by a predatory lender and were
adjusting above what she could afford.  To avoid losing the properties, Applicant
sought out legal counsel, who advised her to file for Bankruptcy, placing each of the
properties into Bankruptcy.  Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in November
2009.  She dismissed the Bankruptcy in January 2010.  She filed for Chapter 13 again
3
in February 2010 and dismissed it in March 2010.  She filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy
in April 2012.  Her debts were discharged in August 2012. Applicant’s attorney did not
file a reaffirmation on the houses.  Applicant continued to make the mortgage
payments throughout the process in a timely manner.  The  lienholder took no action
against the Applicant.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  Applicant continues to own the houses.
She is now comfortably able to afford each of the mortgages on the three properties.
She has active renters in the two rentals and she resides in her primary resident.  She
now has conventional first trust deeds on each house and no second mortgages. 
 
A state tax lien was entered against the Applicant in 2011 in the amount of
$114.  Applicant submitted a Release of Lien dated April 16, 2015.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit B.)  
A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the amount of $71.
Applicant paid the debt in full. A letter from the creditor dated April 16, 2015, regarding
the account shows a zero balance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
Applicant has no delinquent debts and is current with all of her regular monthly
living expenses.  She owns three houses, with equity in each one, and has about
$3,000 in savings for emergencies.  She has no other retirement accounts.  She has
never had any problems at work for violating security policy or regulation or doing
something inappropriate.  (Tr. p. 37.)  She understands that she mst be fiscally
responsible and live within her means at all times while holding a security clearance.
(Tr. p. 43.)   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.
An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
4
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
    b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
5
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a
determination.” The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or
conclusions that have reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The
Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions based on evidence, which is speculative
or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive
Order 10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with her security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that the large Federal tax lien alleged in allegation 1.a. of
the SOR is not the Applicant’s lien, but a mistake on the part of the IRS.  The two
other small debts she has paid off and provided proof of payment.  She explained that
she filed multiple bankruptcies, upon the advice of her attorney, in order to protect her
properties from foreclosure, which proved to be successful for her.  She is current with
all of her regular monthly expenses and has no delinquent debts.  Under the
circumstances, Applicant made a good-faith effort to resolve her debts.  She
understands that she must remain fiscally responsible if she is to hold a security
clearance.  Furthermore, she has not incurred any new debt that she cannot afford to
6
pay.  There is clear evidence of financial rehabilitation.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d)
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case,
the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified
information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It mitigates the negative
effects of her financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on her ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has
overcome the Government's case opposing her request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For  Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For  Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.b.: For  Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: For  Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.d.: For  Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.e.: For  Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For  Applicant.
7
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
