 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            1 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                        
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 15-00266 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Appellant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline E 
(personal conduct) and Guideline D (sexual behavior). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines E and D. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            2 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. On August 21, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 25, 2015, 
Department Counsel compiled the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) that 
contained documents identified as Items 1 through 7.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded to Applicant a 
copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any additional information and objections 
within 30 days of its receipt. On October 31, 2015, Applicant submitted a response. In 
his Response to the FORM, Applicant expressed no objections to Items 1 through 7. 
Department Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s Response to the FORM, which has 
been marked as Item 8. The case was assigned to me on November 10, 2015. Items 1 
through 8 are entered into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old technical publications librarian who works for a 
defense contractor. He has worked in his current position since May 2013. He 
graduated from high school in 1979 and received a diploma in theology in 1980. He 
served on active duty in the Navy from December 1980 to December 2002 and retired 
honorably. He has been married since 1986 and has four children ranging in age from 
18 to 28. He has held a security clearance for a number of years.1 
 
Most of the SOR allegations were alleged under both Guidelines E and D. The 
SOR alleged that Applicant was terminated from a job in December 2009 after a 
coworker observed him viewing what was believed to be child pornography on a 
desktop computer (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a); that his wife does not know that he continued 
to view child pornography after his job termination (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.a); and, that he 
communicated with others online his desire to view and fantasize about engaging in 
sexual contact with children, traded child pornography, masturbated while viewing such 
images, and viewed such images after his job termination (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 2.b). The 
SOR alleged solely under Guideline E that he falsified facts about his viewing of 
pornography at his work computer during an interview with a DOD investigator (SOR ¶ 
1.b).2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He admitted part of the conduct alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b and denied other aspects of those allegations. He neither admitted 
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
2 Item 1. 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            3 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
nor denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d, which solely cross-alleged the allegation in SOR 
¶ 2.b.3   
 
In September 2007, Applicant obtained a job at a company [hereinafter referred 
to as “Company B”]. On December 16, 2009, he was terminated from his position at 
Company B for “Gross Conduct.” In his security clearance application dated June 6, 
2013, Applicant indicated that he was fired from Company B for “internet use.”4 
 
On November 18, 2013, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant. The summary of that interview stated in part: 
 
On an unrecalled date in Dec 2009 [Applicant] was at work in his cubicle 
at [Company B] surfing the internet and was looking at pictures on 
Myspace.com and Flickr. [He] stated that [Company B’s] policy was that 
the internet resources were not to be used except for the conduct of 
[Company B’s] business and that his use of the internet to access the 
Myspace.com and Flickr sites was bad judgment on his part. As one 
image linked to another, subject found himself looking at pictures of 
scantily clad women and girls. At no point did the images depict nudity or 
sexual acts. [He] only went to the Myspace.com and Flickr websites and at 
no time accessed any pornographic website. All of the pictures of women 
were bikini poses. The pictures showing girls were fully clothed. [He] did 
not begin surfing with the intent to look at pictures of women and girls; the 
pictures came up as links, one hyperlink led to another, and [he] followed 
them. This was the first and only time [he] had misused the internet at 
work. Unknown to [him] at the time, one of the female team leads (name 
unrecalled) had passed by [his] cube and saw the pictures displayed on 
his computer screen. [He] did not recall the amount of time he spent 
looking at the pictures but within a few moments [he] realized that he was 
violating [Company B’s] policy against internet use and turned away from 
the websites. [He] assumed that the female team lead had gone to the 
manager and reported [his] activities. [He] already exited the websites 
when the female team lead came back to [his] cubicle and summoned 
[him] to the conference room. The [Company B] manager (name 
unrecalled) was in the conference [room] waiting for [him], and upon [his] 
entry, restated the [Company B] policy against internet use and terminated 
[his] employment.5 
                                                          
3 Item 2. 
4 Items 3 and 5. 
5 Item 4. In responding to DOD CAF interrogatories on April 30, 2014, Applicant indicated the 
summary of his OPM background interview on November 18, 2013, accurately reflected the information 
he provided to the investigator on that occasion. 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            4 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
A federal law enforcement report dated December 31, 2009, indicated an internal 
investigation revealed that Applicant’s work computer contained numerous images of 
pornography and several images of suspected child pornography. While accessing his 
Flickr account, Applicant apparently conducted an internet search using the search term 
“nude kids” with the internet search engine’s “safesearch” preferences set to off. The 
report also noted that it appeared Applicant had been in contact with traders of child 
pornography while accessing his Flickr account. During a work-exit interview, Applicant 
reportedly stated he had been distributing and receiving child pornography on his work 
computer and indicated his interest was in “8 to 9 year old girls.” A forensic examination 
of the images on Applicant’s work computer confirmed the presence of child 
pornography.6  
 
On July 28, 2010, federal law enforcement agents interviewed Applicant at his 
home. During that interview, Applicant indicated that he was fired from his job at 
Company B because he admitted to viewing child pornography at his work station. He 
further stated that he began looking at both adult and child pornography at his work 
station in the summer of 2009. His wife knew why Company B fired him, but did not 
know that he continued to view child pornography. He admitted that he conducted 
online chats in which he communicated his desire to view and fantasize about engaging 
in sexual contact with female children. He stated he never touched a child in an 
inappropriate manner nor had he taken inappropriate photographs of children. He used 
an alias computer name and had a username that included the term “toddlerlover.” He 
identified a website in which he viewed and traded child pornography and admitted to 
viewing such images as recently as a week before the interview. He explained that he 
retrieved such images from a computer link, masturbated while looking at them, and 
would then logout of the link without saving the image to his computer. No images were 
found during a cursory search of his home computer. Applicant described “child 
pornography” as images of children under the age of 18 engaging in sexual contact with 
other children or adults. He indicated that he “did not think that images of nude girls was 
a problem.” In August 2010, the local U.S. attorney declined to prosecute Applicant.7 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that he intentionally lied to the OPM 
investigator. He stated that he misunderstood the question about how long he had been 
viewing pornography. He claimed he told the investigator he viewed it for a few months, 
but was unsure when he started doing so. He also said he thought the investigator was 
asking if he had ever looked at that type of material at any other job or time in his life, 
and he could honestly answer “no” to that question. In his Response to the FORM, he 
made similar statements claiming he misunderstood the timeframe of the investigator’s 
question.8   
                                                          
6 Item 6. 
7 Items 6 and 7. 
8 Items 2 and 8. 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            5 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a letter dated August 10, 2015, 
from his wife. She noted the he admitted to her why he was fired from Company B. She 
was devastated upon learning of his behavior and left him for a period. Upon her return 
in the spring of 2010, he informed her that he had three or four relapses while she was 
gone. She further stated that he “last strayed” months before being interviewed by the 
federal law enforcement agents. In his Response to the FORM, Applicant stated that, 
after the federal law enforcement interview, he “came clean with his wife” and has not 
“returned to child or any other pornography.”9 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he conducted internet chats 
with unknown people about his desire to view child pornography. He acknowledged this 
was a grave error in judgment. He denied ever masturbating while looking at those 
images. He indicated that he became confused during the federal law enforcement 
interview and stated he only continued to view such images until late spring 2010.  He 
indicated that he is willing to undergo treatment, but provided no evidence that he has 
actually received any treatment.10 
 
In his Response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a work performance 
evaluation dated October 26, 2015. On a scale of one to five, he received an overall 
rating of 3.88, which was between the categories of “satisfactory” and “outstanding.” He 
was described as very dependable and was recommended for retention at the 
company.11 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
                                                          
9 Items 2 and 8. 
10 Items 2 and 8. 
11 Item 8. 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            6 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            7 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information;  
 
* * * 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or  rule violations; and  
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            8 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
 In December 2009, Applicant was terminated form his job because he viewed 
pornography on his work computer. During a federal law enforcement interview, 
Applicant admitted that he chatted online about his fantasies of engaging in sexual 
contact with children, masturbated when viewing child pornography, and traded child 
pornography online. The evidence also supports a determination that, as of August 10, 
2015, his wife did not know that he continued to view child pornography until at least a 
week before his federal law enforcement interview in July 2010. Her letter also 
contradicts his statement in the Response to the FORM that he “came clean” to his wife 
after the federal law enforcement interview. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) apply.   
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An incorrect statement or omission, standing alone, does 
not prove falsification. A falsification must be made with a culpable state of mind, such 
as intent to deceive. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the incorrect statement or 
omission. See ISCR 03-09483 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). In this case, SOR ¶ 1.b 
alleged Applicant falsified material facts during the OPM interview when he stated the 
incident in December 2009 was the first and only time he misused the internet at work. 
The federal law enforcement report, however, revealed that Applicant had begun 
looking at both adult and child pornography on his work computer in the summer of 
2009. A comparison of the summary of his OPM interview and the federal law 
enforcement report also revealed other significant inconsistencies between those two 
statements. In the OPM interview, Applicant claimed he stumbled upon the questionable 
images while surfing the internet and indicated those images did not depict nudity or 
sexual activity. The federal law enforcement revealed the he actively searched for child 
pornography and, in doing so, viewed such images on his work computer. He intended 
to mislead the investigator by his statements. Substantial evidence exists to establish 
that Applicant intentionally falsified material facts during the OPM interview by stating 
the December 2009 incident was the first and only time he misused the internet at work. 
AG ¶ 16(b) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advise of 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            9 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 According to the record, Applicant last viewed child pornography in July 2010, 
which was over five years ago.  He indicated that he was willing to undergo treatment, 
but failed to provide proof he has received any treatment. He intentionally provided false 
information during a November 2013 interview. He has continued to deny the 
falsification allegation in his Answer to the SOR and Response to the FORM. He has 
failed to establish that he has reformed and rehabilitated himself. His misconduct is 
recent and repetitive. After examining all of the applicable mitigating conditions, I find 
that none apply. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence, coercion, exploitation, or duress 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference concerning 
the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
Four sexual behavior disqualifying conditions are listed under AG ¶ 13: 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            10 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Applicant continued to engage in the self-destructive behavior of viewing child 
pornography online even after he was fired from his job and his wife left him for a 
temporary period. For the reasons stated under the disqualifying conditions for 
Guideline E, AG ¶¶ 13(a) through 13(d) apply.  
 
 Four sexual behavior mitigating conditions are listed under AG ¶ 14: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature;  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal sexual behavior occurred while he was an adult. His 
misconduct and his attempts to minimize it raise serious questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. For the reasons stated under Guideline E, none of the 
Guideline D mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
appellant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the appellant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            11 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s personal information, military service, and work history. 
Except for a work performance evaluation and letter from his wife, minimal whole-
person evidence was presented. Considering the seriousness of Applicant’s repeated 
misconduct, his attempts to minimize it, and the absence of sufficient evidence showing 
reform or rehabilitation, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the personal conduct and sexual 
behavior guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
     
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                                            12 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                                 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
