KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s error about the total amount of debt was ultimately harmless in that his
overall conclusion would have been the same had he not made the error.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 15-01184.a1
DATE: 12/24/2015
DATE: December 24, 2015
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-01184
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 5, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
1The SOR contains only one allegation, the bankruptcy filing.  
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a hearing.
On October 16, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has been employed by a Defense contractor for three years.  He is studying for a
master’s degree.  Applicant served in the National Guard for about seven years and in the Inactive
Reserves for two.  He was unemployed from December 2010 until November 2011.  He is married,
and the household includes three children of his wife’s and his own child from a previous marriage.
Two of the children have medical and developmental issues.  Applicant’s net monthly income is
$4,100, with a remainder of $410 after expenses.
Applicant experienced financial problems starting in 2009, due to his wife having undergone
two surgical procedures with a consequent inability to work.  Their children also had medical
problems requiring frequent doctor’s visits.  In about 2006, Applicant’s employer switched to a
health savings plan, which increased employees’ out-of-pocket expenses for medical treatment.
Additionally, Applicant’s family did not have health insurance during his unemployment.  The
family’s medical bills became delinquent because Applicant prioritized their debts, focusing on
providing for their children and paying their mortgage.  
In addition to medical debts, Applicant experienced tax problems.  Taxes were not withheld
from the commissions Applicant’s wife earned from her employment.  The couple filed their returns
as “married filing separately.”  Decision at 3.  Applicant’s wife did not file from 2005 until 2009.
Federal and state tax authorities placed liens on the family’s property.  Applicant’s wife states that
she is responsible for the tax liens as they arose from her employment.  She is currently attending
school, paying tuition through student loans.  These loans are currently in forbearance.  Applicant
is a co-signer on student loans for his children.
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in August 2014.  He admitted this
allegation in his response to the SOR.1  Applicant’s liabilities were nearly $540,000 and his assets
were just under $200,000.  At the hearing, Applicant disputed the amount of debt, contending that
the true amount was a little over $200,000.  In addition, Applicant submitted a document to the
effect that he is responsible for only a limited part of the debts, with much of the debt belonging to
his wife.  The Judge suggested that Applicant might want to talk with his bankruptcy attorney after
3
the hearing and obtain a statement regarding the true amount of Applicant’s debts.  After the
hearing, Applicant submitted a letter from his bankruptcy attorney.  The letter stated that the Judge
had confirmed the payment plan, which will pay all secured debts and mortgage arrears.  The
secured debts include about $2,500 of the nearly $89,000 tax lien.  The remainder will be treated as
unsecured debt.  The Judge found, however, the tax debt will not be discharged by bankruptcy.
The attorney also stated that a second mortgage will be treated as an unsecured debt.  The
unsecured creditors will receive 1% of the amounts owed to them and the remainder will be
discharged.  The attorney did not state that the amount of Applicant’s debts had changed.  The
amount stated in the SOR, $540,000, is accurate.
The Judge found that Applicant is responsible for a majority of the debts listed in the
bankruptcy documents.  He noted that, although his wife filed separately, he lived in the household
and benefitted from her income.  He also noted that the medical debts were incurred for members
of the family and that Applicant was a co-signer on his children’s student loans.   
Applicant is considered an exceptional employee who has excellent rapport with leaders in
the organization.  His performance appraisals show that he has met or exceeded his goals.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred over a significant period
of time and have not been resolved.  Moreover, although some of them were due to circumstances
outside Applicant’s control, others were not.  He presented no evidence of actions taken to resolve
his debts except the filing of a bankruptcy petition in 2014.  While this is a legitimate means of
resolving debts, Applicant has now shown responsible action, given the facts in the case.  He stated
that Applicant was aware of his delinquent debts since November 2012, when he was interviewed
for his clearance.  The first action he took was to file for bankruptcy in August 2014, just before he
received the SOR.  He stated that the limited payments made under the bankruptcy plan are not
sufficient to establish a meaningful track record of debt reform.  He stated that “there is ample
evidence of irresponsible behavior, poor judgment, and lack of financial reliability.”  Id. at 8.  In the
whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s good duty performance and his military
service.  However, he concluded that Applicant had not acted reasonably or responsibly in regard
to his debts.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge erred in some of his findings.  For example, he draws our
attention to the finding that the tax debts would not be discharged in bankruptcy, citing to the letter
from his attorney that, he contends, asserts the contrary.  He also challenges the Judge’s finding
about the total amount of the debts at issue here.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are
supported by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
2Applicant also states that the Judge misspelled the name of Applicant’s wife, who had served as a personal
representative at the hearing.  He acknowledges that this error is minor but contends that it shows that the Judge erred.
We note this error but do not find it to have exerted any influence on the case.
4
Concerning the tax debt, the letter states, in pertinent part: “[T]he plan proposes to pay only
the secured portion of  $2,544.52.  The remaining amount will be treated just like other unsecured
creditors.  Therefore, most of this $88,839.62 will be discharged upon the successful completion of
the case.”  Applicant Exhibit J, Letter dated August 4, 2015 (emphasis added).  Insofar as the
challenged finding was apparently a description of this document’s contents, it is erroneous.
However, the Judge’s decision relied for the most part on the amount of Applicant’s debt, the
relative recency of his bankruptcy filing, the absence of a meaningful track record of debt payment
or reduction, and evidence to the effect that much of the debt was due to circumstances within
Applicant’s control.  Therefore, even if the Judge had not made this error, his overall conclusion
would most likely have been the same.  This error is harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03601
at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 1, 2015).  The finding about the total amount of debt is supported by Applicant’s
response to the SOR and by the bankruptcy documents included in the record as Government Exhibit
3.  We find no harmful error in the Judge’s material findings of security concern.2  The findings
satisfy the requirements of the Directive.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The Judge stated that Applicant’s bankruptcy consisted basically of a plan to pay off debts
in the future.  He concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated a track record of debt repayment,
which was consistent with the record that was before him.  Promises to pay off delinquent debts in
the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise
acting in a financially responsible manner.  See, e. g., ISCR Case No. 14-04565 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep.
18, 2015).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
  The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
5
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
