 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00235 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 6, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted in a file of relevant material (FORM) on September 4, 2015. In the FORM, 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel amended the SOR by adding three allegations under Guideline E, 
personal conduct.  
  
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 22, 2015. He responded 
with a letter that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibit (Ex) A. Department Counsel asked 
him to clarify whether he still wanted the case decided on the written record or if he 
wanted a hearing. Applicant responded that he still wanted the case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. The e-mail correspondence is marked Appellate 
Exhibit (AE) I. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2015. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM and AE A are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. He has an associate’s degree that was awarded in 
2005. He has never married, and he has no children.1   
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana about twice a week from 2002 through 2010. He 
received a citation in 2004 for possession of marijuana. He received pretrial diversion in 
which he was required to complete 150 hours of community service. He received a 
citation in 2009 for possession of drug paraphernalia. He paid a $75 fine. He used 
cocaine in 2010.2    
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2008 for driving under the influence (DUI). He was 
found not guilty in 2011. He received inpatient treatment in 2010 after a suicide attempt. 
The treatment included drug and alcohol counseling. There is no evidence that he has 
used any illegal drugs since 2010.3   
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
January 2014. Section 22 asked: 
 
Section 22 - Police Record  
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the court 
record, or the charge was dismissed. You need not report convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Item 4. Applicant’s drug and alcohol issues were not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. They are discussed because he had an obligation to report them on his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86).  
 
3 
 
3607. Be sure to include all incidents whether occurring in the U.S. or 
abroad. 
 
Police Record 
 
Have any of the following happened? (If ‘Yes’ you will be asked to provide 
details for each offense that pertains to the actions that are identified 
below.) 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been issued a summons, 
citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against 
you? (Do not check if all the citations involved traffic infractions 
where the fine was less than $300 and did not include alcohol or 
drugs) 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been arrested by any police 
officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement 
official? 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been charged, convicted, or 
sentenced of a crime in any court? (Include all qualifying charges, 
convictions or sentences in any Federal, state, local, military, or 
non-U.S. court, even if previously listed on this form). 
* * * 
 
Police Record (EVER) 
 
Other than those offenses already listed, have you EVER had the 
following happen to you? 
 
* * * 
 
 Have you EVER been charged with an offense related to alcohol or 
drugs? 
 
Section 23 of the SF 86 asked about illegal drug use and activity, including the following 
questions: 
 
Illegal Use of Drugs or Controlled Substances 
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you illegally used any controlled 
substances? Use of a controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, 
inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or otherwise consuming any drug 
or controlled substance.  
 
 
 
4 
 
Illegal Drug Activity 
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you been involved in the illegal 
purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production, transfer, 
shipping, receiving, handling, or sale of used any drug or controlled 
substance?4   
 
 Applicant reported his DUI arrest on the SF 86, but he failed to list his illegal drug 
use and his drug-related criminal citations. Applicant discussed those matters during his 
background interview in February 2014. He told the investigator that he did not list his 
illegal drug use because he did not want to be disqualified immediately, and he wanted 
a chance to explain himself to an investigator. He denied that he intentionally failed to 
list his drug-related criminal citations. He stated that he did not list his citation in 2004 
for possession of marijuana because he did not have all the information and he did not 
know how to proceed without all the information. He stated that he did not list his 
citation in 2009 for possession of drug paraphernalia because he did not understand the 
question.5   
 
 Applicant wrote in his response to the FORM that he “did not, and will not, 
knowingly falsify information to the DOD, US Government, or anyone.” He discussed 
why he did not divulge his drug-related criminal charges on his SF 86. He stated that he 
“was forthcoming with this information and it is recorded in the transcript of the initial 
investigation,” and he was “perplexed as to how this can be construed as falsifying 
information.” He did not address why he failed to divulge his illegal drug use.6   
 
 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant intentionally provided false 
information about his drug use and his drug-related criminal citations on his SF 86. 
There is insufficient evidence for a finding that he intentionally falsified the following 
question:  
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you been involved in the illegal 
purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production, transfer, 
shipping, receiving, handling, or sale of used any drug or controlled 
substance?  
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $20,778. The 
debts were listed on credit reports from February 2014, October 2014, and July 2015. 
Applicant denied owing all the debts. He stated the debts were either paid or did not 
belong to him. The most recent credit report only lists two of the debts alleged in the 
SOR, both medical debts. The $8,000 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is listed on the 
2015 credit report as having a balance of $1,200.7   
                                                          
4 Item 3.  
 
5 Items 3, 4.  
 
6 Ex. A.  
 
7 Items 2, 4-7; Ex. A. 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about his drug-related criminal 
citations on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable to SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. He also 
intentionally provided false information about his drug use. However, SOR ¶ 2.a did not 
allege that he falsified the question that asked about his drug use; it alleged that he 
falsified the illegal drug activity question. There is insufficient evidence for a finding that 
he intentionally falsified that specific question. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
7 
 
 Applicant discussed his drug use and criminal citations during his background 
interview in February 2014. AG ¶ 17(a) has some applicability. However, his statement 
in his response to the FORM that he “did not, and will not, knowingly falsify information 
to the DOD, US Government, or anyone” is false. Applicant still has not learned that the 
DOD expects the truth from the individuals it entrusts with classified information. 
Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
8 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The most recent credit report lends credibility to Applicant’s statement that his 
debts have been paid or disputed. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but he did not mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
