 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05830 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 24, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 7, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
 
2 
 
 
29, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 17, 2015. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In addition, the Government submitted an exhibit list that was marked 
as Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant and one witness testified. She offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through E, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 30, 2015.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.e. There was no objection and the 
motion was granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. She is a high school graduate. She served in the 
military from 1979 to 1992, attained the rank of E-6, and was honorably discharged. She 
married in 1978 and divorced in 1999.1 She has been in a committed relationship since 
2012. Applicant has four grown children, ages 32, 31, 29 and 26. She provides financial 
support to her 31-year-old daughter, who has two children, and is attending school. She 
helps support her two grandchildren. She also provides some financial assistance to her 
29-year-old son who recently lost his job.2  
 
 Applicant has been in business with her cohabitant for ten years. They have 
worked as a subcontractor for a government contractor for about a year. Before then, 
they worked for a different government contractor for about three years.3  
 
 Applicant testified that when she was in her 40s she attempted to financially help 
her children. She was a single mother and had the sole responsibility for them. Her 
children would get into financial problems and she would help them. This resulted in her 
delaying paying her own debts. She admitted she had financial difficulties from 2004 to 
2009.4  
 
 Applicant indicated that she disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($232) owed to a 
telephone company. She stated she contacted the creditor by telephone because the 
account was not from the state where she resided, and it did not belong to her. She 
                                                          
1 Applicant and her ex-husband separated in 1997 after he was arrested and charged with a serious 
felony. She has not had contact with him since 1997. She was solely responsible for their children.  
 
2 Tr. 47-53. 
 
3 Tr. 53-54. 
 
4 Tr. 45-48. 
 
3 
 
 
requested the account be removed from her credit report. She did not receive written 
correspondence from the creditor. Her November 2014 credit report reflects the account 
is in dispute. The account is not listed on her November 2015 credit report.5 
 
 The debt is SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,257) is for cell phones. Applicant testified that the 
company sent her three free cell phones. She sent the cell phones back, yet it still 
charged her activation fees. She was unaware of the debt until she had her background 
interview with a government investigator. After the interview, she contacted the cell 
phone company, and it advised her it did not have a record of the debt. She disputed 
the debt on her credit report. The November 2014 credit report shows the debt was in 
collection. The November 2015 credit report does not reflect this debt.6 
 
 Applicant stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($330) is more than ten years old. She 
indicated that a long time ago she disputed the debt online through the credit bureau. 
The November 2014 credit report indicates the debt is being disputed. The debt is no 
longer listed on the November 2015 credit report.7 
 
 Applicant indicated she paid the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($571). After her 
background interview she contacted the creditor and was advised they no longer had a 
record of the debt. She asked the creditor to remove the debt from her credit report. It is 
not reflected on her most recent credit report.8 
  
 In June 2007, Applicant cosigned a car loan with her son (SOR ¶ 1.f, $13,340). 
She testified that she was making the monthly payments and the loan was not in 
arrears. Her son was in an accident with the car, and the insurance paid for the repairs. 
Her son’s driver’s license was suspended for failing to pay an out-of-state ticket. She 
stated that because her son continued to drive with a suspended license, the car was 
repossessed in 2009, even though the loan was being paid and she had a valid license. 
Applicant attempted to get the car back, but was unsuccessful. Her son advised her that 
the car was sold. She understood she was equally responsible for the debt because she 
cosigned the loan. Applicant disputed the debt because she believed the creditor 
wrongfully repossessed the vehicle because the loan was not delinquent. Despite her 
attempts the creditor refused to return the vehicle, because they sold it and refused to 
cancel the debt. The debt is listed as charged-off on her most recent credit report. She 
testified she disputed the debt with the creditor, but it refused to provide her anything in 
writing. She also stated that she believed her son had contacted the creditor, but she 
                                                          
5 Tr. 21-24. GE 3 is a credit report dated November 11, 2014. AE D is a credit report dated November 12, 
2015. 
 
6 Tr. 25-31; GE 3; AE E. 
 
7 Tr. 31-33; GE 3; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. 33-34; GE 3; AE E. 
 
 
4 
 
 
did not have confirmation of his actions. She has not received an Internal Revenue 
Service cancellation of debt form. The debt remains on her most recent credit report.9 
 
 Applicant did not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($476), but acknowledged that 
at one time she had an account with the creditor, but did not believe she still owed a 
balance. It is on her 2014 credit report as charged off. It is not listed on her 2015 credit 
report. She believed the account was resolved.10  
 
 Applicant testified that she is current on all of her monthly expenses and bills. 
She maintains a detailed written budget. She has timely filed her tax returns and paid 
her taxes. She does not have any new delinquent debts and the only one remaining on 
her credit report is the car loan (SOR ¶ 1.f). Applicant has not had any financial 
counseling.11   
 
 Applicant’s business partner and cohabitant testified on her behalf. He has 
known her for 14 years and they have worked together. He described Applicant as a 
war veteran who raised four children by herself. She gave up her military career to take 
care of her children. He and Applicant share their income and living expenses. He 
believes Applicant is trustworthy.12 
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a supervisor who stated she was 
consistently impressed with Applicant’s attitude toward her work and performance on 
the job. She has productive working relationships with the customers and the office 
staff. Applicant has demonstrated the highest degree of maintaining confidentiality 
regarding her work. Her character has never been in doubt. She is trusted, honest, and 
maintains the highest level of integrity. Other supervisors described Applicant as 
completely trustworthy, dependable, dedicated, loyal, and professional. She completely 
abided by her employer’s policies and procedures.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 35-41, 59; GE 3; AE E. 
 
10 Tr. 41-44; GE 3; AE E. 
 
11 Tr. 44, 50, 55-58, 65-67. 
 
12 Tr. 61-65. 
 
13 AE B, C, and D. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant had delinquent debts that were unpaid for several years. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant acknowledged she had financial problems from 2004 to 2009. She was 
a single mother raising four children and was helping them financially. Only one debt 
that was alleged remains on her most recent credit report. She credibly testified that she 
believed her son was contacting the creditor to resolve that debt. After considering 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s testimony, demeanor, and candor, I found her testimony was credible. She 
has a written budget and is paying her current expenses. There are no new delinquent 
debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant and her son are still resolving the 
car loan debt (SOR ¶ 1.f), and therefore the debt is recent.  
 
Applicant’s attributed her financial problems to helping her children and 
grandchildren. This was somewhat beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is some 
evidence that Applicant contacted creditors because she believed the debts were paid 
or were in error. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant did not provide proof she had paid the debts alleged in the SOR. She 
provided a copy of her most recent credit report that indicates she has only one 
remaining delinquent debt (SOR ¶ 1.f) listed. It appears she is living within her means, 
has a written budget, and is paying her monthly expenses on time. There are clear 
indications Applicant’s financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
 
There is some evidence that Applicant attempted to resolve some of her debts by 
contacting the creditors. Applicant disputed certain debts alleged in the SOR because 
she believed she had paid the debts, they did not belong to her, or they had been 
otherwise resolved and removed from her credit report. It appears many of the debts 
are old and from a time when she admittedly was having financial problems. Except for 
the car loan in SOR ¶ 1.f, none of the other SOR debts appear on her most recent credit 
report. The report does not reflect the reason they are no longer listed. AG ¶ 20(d) 
partially applies. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the debts she disputed.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 56 years old. She served in the military for more than 12 years and 
then as a single mother supported and raised her children. Over the years she has 
helped them financially and continues to provide financial support to two of her children 
and her grandchildren. She does not have a stellar financial record. However, Applicant 
has worked hard to be more financially responsible. Her most recent credit report 
reflects only one debt. It is substantial and she has been disputing it with the creditor. It 
is unknown why the other debts were removed from her credit report. I found Applicant’s 
testimony credible and believe she is living within her means. Although her financial 
history is not perfect, I do not believe it rises to the level of being a security concern. 
The Government does not require applicants to be debt-free or that all of their debts 
must be completely paid, but rather an applicant must show they are acting responsibly 
and their conduct does not raise questions about their reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I find Applicant met her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record 
evidence does not leave me with questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:    Withdrawn  
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
