 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00460 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Guideline E (personal conduct) security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 1, 2012, a Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) incident 
report was filed against Applicant. On February 17, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal conduct), J 
(criminal conduct), and F (financial considerations). DOD CAF took that action under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
On March 24, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on June 15, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 7, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled on July 22, 2015. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through N. Department Counsel’s hearsay objection to AE G was 
overruled. The remaining exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 29, 2015.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to withdraw the allegations under Guidelines J and 
F. Applicant had no objection to that motion. The motion was granted and those 
allegations were withdrawn.1 
 
 Department Counsel requested that administrative notice be taken of 18 U.S.C. § 
930. Applicant had no objection to that request. The administrative notice request was 
granted.2  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old aircraft electrician who has been working for his 
current employer since October 2012. He graduated from high school in 1976 and has 
completed some college courses. He served in the U.S. Air Force from 1983 to 2004 
and honorably retired in the grade of master sergeant (E-7). He has been married for 35 
years and has three children, ages 24, 26, 28. He has held a security clearance since 
about 1983.3 
 
 The SOR listed two Guideline E allegations. They asserted that Applicant was 
suspended from work for three days in September 2011 for failing to comply with 
standard operating procedures in moving a helicopter (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that he was 
terminated from his job in January 2012 for violating company policy and federal law by 
carrying a concealed weapon onto a military installation (SOR ¶ 1.b). In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted those allegations with explanations. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact.4 
 
 Applicant’s former company had a policy that required seven people participate 
in aircraft ground movements and that they use a checklist during those evolutions. For 
helicopter movements, the required people were a tow driver, four spotters (one for 
                                                          
1 Tr. 44-46, 95-98. 
2 Tr. 97. A copy of the statute was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
3 Tr. 5-7, 18, 93-94; GE 1, 2; AE L. 
4 Applicant Answer to the SOR.  
 
 
3 
 
each rotor blade), a brake operator in the helicopter, and a roving supervisor. In 
September 2011, Applicant was involved in the movement of an Air Force helicopter as 
the tow driver when no checklist was used and only four people participated. During that 
movement, the helicopter rolled off the taxiway and became stuck in the mud. The 
helicopter was not structurally damaged, but its paint was scratched.5 
 
 Due to the helicopter mishap, Applicant and the movement supervisor were 
suspended from work for three days. He testified that, prior to that mishap, he had 
routinely participated in helicopter and other aircraft movements without the required 
number of personnel. He noted that he participated in evening aircraft movements when 
there were not enough personnel working at that time to comply with the policy and, 
even though the company knew the requisite number of personnel were not present, it 
expected the aircraft would be moved. He noted that the September 2011 helicopter 
mishap became a big issue because Air Force personnel witnessed it, and his company 
was embarrassed.6   
 
 On January 31, 2012, Applicant was terminated from his job for carrying a 
weapon onto a U.S. Army installation. Earlier that month, Applicant and other company 
personnel traveled on a two-week business trip to the Army installation in another state. 
Prior to the trip, one of his coworkers advised Applicant that the hotel at which they 
were staying was not located in a safe area. Applicant decided to take a handgun with 
him on the trip. He was licensed to carry a concealed weapon in his home state. He 
complied with Transportation Security Administration (TSA) procedures in transporting 
the handgun on the flight for that business trip.7   
 
 Applicant testified that he did not violate any state law in carrying the handgun at 
the temporary duty location. He felt uncomfortable leaving the handgun unattended in 
the hotel room while he and his coworkers were working on the Army installation. He 
decided that he would leave it in the locked glovebox of the rental car while they were 
present on the military installation. For about five days during that trip, he traveled onto 
the Army installation with the handgun in the glovebox. He never notified gate guards of 
the presence of the handgun. One of his coworkers reported to company officials that 
Applicant was transporting the handgun onto the Army installation. His company 
recalled him early from the business trip and, shortly thereafter, terminated his 
employment. Authorities at the Army installation never knew that he transported the 
handgun onto the installation.8 
 
The JPAS entry reporting Applicant’s termination stated “he carried a concealed 
weapon on numerous trips while supporting classified DoD contracts both on and off 
                                                          
5 Tr. 72, 74-83; GE 2, 3. 
6 Tr. 73-77, 82-83, 91-93; GE 2, 3. 
7 Tr. 50-59, 67; GE 2, 3. 
8 Tr. 50-52, 61-63, 67-68; GE 2.  
 
 
4 
 
military installations.” He testified that he carried a weapon on two other business trips 
for that former employer. He stated both of those trips were to states that honored his 
license to carry a concealed weapon. On one of those trips, all of his coworkers were 
carrying weapons and, when they arrived at a military installation, they all placed their 
weapons in the glovebox of the vehicle. Applicant did not know how his company 
became aware that he transported weapons onto military installations during prior trips.9  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b stated that Applicant violated Federal law by carrying a concealed 
weapon onto a military installation. Section 930 of Title 18 United States Code prohibits 
the knowing possession of a firearm or weapon in a Federal facility. “The term ‘Federal 
facility’ means a building or part thereof owned or leased by the Federal Government, 
where Federal employees are regularly present for the purpose of performing their 
official duties.” Applicant testified that he did not take his handgun into a Federal facility. 
The handgun remained in the car while he was on the Army installation. At the hearing, 
no Federal statute was identified that specifically addressed the carrying of firearms 
aboard military installations, which prompted Department Counsel to withdraw the 
criminal conduct allegation.10 
 
Section 4-5.b of Army Regulation 190-11, dated November 15, 2006, states that 
“[t]he carrying of privately-owed weapons, explosives, or ammunition on military 
installations are prohibited unless authorized by the installation commander or his 
designated representative.” No pertinent regulation, directive, or authorization from the 
commander of the installation in question was presented, but guidance from the 
installation’s webpage was submitted. The Army installation in question requires military 
members and their families to register privately owned firearms within 72 hours of 
arriving at the base. Registered firearms are apparently stored in an authorized facility 
on base and are not permitted to be stored in the barracks. Applicant also provided 
documentation establishing that firearms are sold at the installation’s exchange and 
hunting is permitted on the installation. However, the documentation provided only 
discussed bow hunting on the installation.11 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not know that carrying a firearm onto a military 
installation was prohibited. While serving in the Air Force, he lived on a military 
installation, possessed weapons on that installation, and was not required to register 
those weapons with military authorities. He testified that he did not believe he was 
                                                          
9 Tr. 57-59, 66-70; GE 2. Applicant disagreed with two aspects of the Government’s evidence. 
First, in an email attached to the JPAS entry, Applicant was reportedly told by a coworker that his license 
to carry a concealed weapon was not recognized at the temporary duty location, and he reportedly 
responded by stating, “I know, they’ll have to catch me.” He denied making that statement. Second, the 
email also stated that the company verified that there were large signs at the entrance of the military 
installation that indicated firearms were not allowed on base. He did not see those signs, and no one in 
the car brought those signs to his attention. See Tr. 63-64, 67-69; GE 3. 
10 Tr. 30-31, 48-49, 52, 72, 95-97; AE E; HE 1.  
11 Tr. 29-30, 47-49; AE C-G. 
 
 
5 
 
violating any rules when he transported the handgun onto the Army installation. He 
stated that, in admitting to SOR ¶ 1.b, he was merely admitted he carried the handgun 
onto the installation and was not admitting that he knowingly violated any law or 
regulation.12 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant violated company policy by carrying the 
concealed weapon onto the military installation. He stated that he knew the company 
had a policy that prohibited employees from carrying firearms onto its property. 
However, he stated that he was unaware that the company treated a rental car as its 
property for purposes of the firearm ban. He only learned of that interpretation of the 
firearm ban when he was terminated.13    
 
 Applicant testified that he would only carry a firearm onto a military installation in 
the future in accordance with the law and base policy. He stated that he never intended 
to violate any rules in carrying the handgun. He also testified that he would not move 
aircraft in the future without complying with all established procedures.14 
  
 Applicant’s work performance evaluations for 2013 and 2014 reflected that he 
exceeded or significantly exceeded expectations. In March 2013, he was named 
Employee of the Month. He was described as a “go-to” technician because of his 
expertise and uncanny work ethic. He has received monetary and other work 
performance awards.15 
 
 In the military, he was awarded the Air Force Achievement Medal, Air Force 
Commendation Medal, and Joint Service Commendation Medal. He consistently 
received the highest performance grades on his enlisted performance evaluations.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
12 Tr. 49-54, 65-66. 
13 Tr. 52-53, 70-72; GE 2.   
14 Tr. 54, 69; GE 2. 
15 Tr. 84-90; AE I. 
16 AE L, N. 
 
 
6 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. . . .  
 
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
 In September 2011, Applicant was disciplined at work for failing to follow 
standard operating procedures in moving a helicopter. In January 2012, he violated an 
Army regulation and company policy by carrying a handgun onto an Army installation 
and was terminated from his job for doing so. AG 16(d) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
  
 Applicant acted negligently during the helicopter mishap. However, his conduct 
must be examined in context. Personnel at his company routinely moved aircraft without 
complying with all of the standard operating procedures. Supervisory personnel were 
aware that procedures were not always followed during those evolutions, but allowed 
 
 
8 
 
them to continue. Given these circumstances, this mishap does not reflect a reckless 
disregard of the rules or an unwillingness to comply with the rules. This incident does 
not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. AG ¶ 17(d) partially applies. 
 
 Although Applicant violated an Army regulation by transporting a handgun on an 
Army installation, he did not know that he violating any rule by doing so. He was not 
aware of the Army regulation on handguns or the company’s policy on transporting 
handguns in rental cars. He had served in the military and had taken weapons on board 
installations in the past without violating any laws or regulations. He learned a tough 
lesson by taking the handgun on the Army installation. He is now aware of the Army 
regulation and will comply with it. His violation of the Army regulation also does not cast 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. AG ¶ 
17(d) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the Air Force for about 21 years and retired honorably as a 
master sergeant. Since retiring, he has continued to serve the Federal Government by 
working for a defense contractor. He is a valued employee. He has made mistakes, 
expressed remorse, and indicated they will not recur. I found him to be a credible 
individual. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:  Withdrawn 
   Subparagraph 2.a:  Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:  Withdrawn 
    Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.b: Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
