 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04996 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 22, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a naturalized citizen of the United States. He surrendered his Iraqi 
passport to his security officer, shortly after becoming a U.S. citizen. It was 
subsequently destroyed. All of his immediate family members, with the exception of his 
elderly mother-in-law, are residents of the United States. He repaid one debt, is 
rehabilitating his mortgage, and has hired a debt consolidation company to manage his 
remaining delinquent debts. Security concerns raised under Foreign Preference, 
Foreign Influence, and Financial Considerations are mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the Guidelines for 
Foreign Preference, Foreign Influence, and Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on September 12, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on November 16, 2015. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on November 18, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 16, 
2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. The Government also offered the 
cover letter to the discovery materials forwarded to Applicant on November 5, 2015, 
marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and information pertaining to Iraq for administrative 
notice, marked HE II. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left open for 
receipt of additional documents. On December 16 through 18, 2015, Applicant 
submitted additional exhibits, marked AE J through AE V. Department Counsel had no 
objections to AE J through AE V and there were admitted into evidence. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 22, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR.1 After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 40 years old. He was born in Iraq. He grew up in Iraq and served in 
the Iraqi Army as an intelligence officer from 1995 to 2003. In 2003 he surrendered 
himself to the U.S. Forces. After a thorough screening, he was hired as a linguist by a 
U.S. contractor to work for the U.S. Army. He worked as a linguist alongside the U.S. 
Army through various government contractors from December 2005 to September 
2007, and October 2007 to March 2011. He was employed in private sector positions 
from 2011 to 2013. In 2013 he was hired again as a linguist by a federal contractor. He 
has been unemployed since January 2014, with a brief period of employment from 
March to April 2015. He was unemployed until late November 2015, when he accepted 
employment with another government contractor. (GE 2.) 
 
In 2006, while working for the U.S. Army, Applicant’s family received a 
threatening letter from unidentified individuals after they ransacked his house because 
they knew he was working for U.S. led forces. He immediately turned the letter into his 
supervisor, a Major in the U.S. Army, and was told to evacuate his family. His 
immediate family, including his wife, child, parents, and siblings left immediate for safety 
in Jordan. The unidentified insurgents “blew up” his house the next day. (Tr. 38-40.) 
 
Applicant was sponsored by his Army Unit for a special immigration visa to the 
United States. He moved his family to the United States in 2007. He renewed his Iraqi 
passport on July 5, 2007, as he was not yet a U.S. citizen and needed to travel for his 
position as a linguist. His Iraqi passport was set to expire on July 4, 2015. Applicant was 
                                                          
1 The SOR incorrectly started the lettering of the allegations under ¶ 2, with ¶ 2.b. It omitted ¶ 2.a. 
 
3 
 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen in January 2013. On September 5, 2013, he relinquished 
the Iraqi passport to his security officer. The security officer presented an affidavit that 
the passport was surrendered and destroyed. Applicant considers himself as solely a 
U.S. citizen and renounced his Iraqi citizenship. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 14-16, 40-42.) 
 
All of Applicant’s immediate family members and almost all of his extended family 
are residents of the United States. His wife, daughter, brother, and oldest sister are U.S. 
citizens. His wife was naturalized in 2013. His brother and oldest sister became citizens 
in 2014. They do not maintain dual citizenship with Iraq. His mother, father, and 
disabled younger sister are citizens of Iraq, but are permanent residents in the United 
States. They have resided in the United States since 2012. They do not travel to Iraq or 
intend to return there. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 42-52.) 
 
Applicant’s only relative remaining in Iraq is his mother-in-law. She is over 65 
years old and is unable to leave Iraq due to a severe medical condition. Applicant’s 
father-in-law is deceased. His mother-in-law is supported by retirement benefits earned 
by his father-in-law. Applicant has not had any contact with her for five years. (GE 2; GE 
3; Tr. 49-53.) 
 
Applicant had a friendship with an Iraqi citizen while working for a private 
contractor in Iraq. His friend worked in the construction business. He has not had any 
contact with that friend since their business relationship ceased in December 2012. (GE 
3; Tr. 50-54.) 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on 12 accounts. His accounts began to fall 
delinquent for the first time in late 2014 and early 2015, as reflected in his December 
2015 credit report. (GE 8.) He testified that he was current on all of his accounts until his 
January 2014 unemployment. Over the following months, he exhausted his savings to 
pay bills. During that same time period, he and his wife incurred over $120,000 in 
medical bills due to emergency surgeries they both required, because of their lack of 
health insurance due to his unemployment. He kept in contact with his creditors, 
throughout his financial difficulties, and documented that he made payments on some of 
his debts though they were less than his monthly minimums. He was unable to find 
employment until November 2015. (GE 4 through GE 8; Tr. 14-19, 55-75.) 
 
Immediately after obtaining employment in November 2015, Applicant contacted 
a debt management company to consolidate his debts and make payments on them. 
On December 1, 2015, Applicant signed an agreement with the debt management 
company. He enrolled the debts identified in SOR allegations ¶¶ 3.a through 3.g, 3.i, 3.j, 
and 3.l into the repayment plan. The debt management plan established monthly 
payments of $653 from January 20, 2016, through January 20, 2018. He owes a total of 
$31,593 on these debts. The debt management company is in the process of 
negotiating payments with these creditors and anticipates the debts to be resolved for 
approximately $15,289. Applicant presented copies of his December 2015 pay stub that 
shows he will be able to afford the scheduled payment. He testified that he intends to 
repay the debts as quickly as possible. He testified, “my intent is to pay off my --all 
my --what I owe for these creditors, not just for this clearance, it's for my future . . 
 
4 
 
.” (Tr. 74.) Applicant is acting responsibly, given the circumstances, with respect to 
these debts. (Tr. 55-75.) 
 
Applicant is $27,747 delinquent on his home mortgage, identified in ¶ 3.h, in the 
total amount of $335,315. He entered a home affordable modification program. It is a 
trial program that will allow him to rehabilitate his mortgage by adding the delinquent 
amount back into the mortgage. His December 12, 2015 credit report reflects this debt 
as “paying under a partial payment agreement.” This debt is being resolved. (GE 8.) 
 
Applicant’s December 12, 2015 credit report dated has two entries for the debt to 
creditor 3.k. Both bear the same account number. The second entry shows the debt in ¶ 
3.k was “paid and closed”. This debt is resolved. (GE 8, at 9.) 
 
Applicant is highly respected by those know him. His performance as a linguist 
was praised by numerous high-ranking officers that served with Applicant. One 
lieutenant colonel opined, “his experience, interpreting skills, professionalism, and 
dedication to duty make him an outstanding asset to any organization.” (AE K; AE L; AE 
M; AE N; AE Q.) His performance review from 2006 to 2007 reflects that his “service 
was exemplary and noteworthy.” His duties were performed “in an active combat zone,” 
and his conduct “was without reproach and executed under periodic hostile fire.” (AE J.) 
He has received several awards for his service. (AE O; AE P; AE R.)  
 
Iraq 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning the state of Iraq, as outlined in HE II, including the following: Iraq has made 
significant political and economic progress in recent years, but the country still faces 
many challenges. Numerous terrorist groups are increasingly active throughout Iraq. 
The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or Islamic State) control approximately 
one third of the country’s territory. The country’s economy is suffering from ongoing 
criminal and terrorist violence and government mismanagement. Additionally, Al Qaeda 
affiliates continue to represent a major threat to Iraqi stability. Due to attacks from ISIL, 
the Iraqi government has lost large areas of control over areas of the country. The ISIL 
offensive has caused Iran to increase military support to the Iraqi government, 
potentially increasing Tehran’s influence within the Iraqi government.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes one condition in this case that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 10.2 The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
  Applicant possessed an Iraqi passport at the time of his naturalization as a U.S. 
citizen in January 2013. He retained that passport for approximately nine months after 
becoming a U.S. citizen. He relinquished his Iraqi passport to his security officer in 
September 2013. It was subsequently destroyed. He no longer possesses a “current 
foreign passport,” and has not done so for over two years. The evidence is insufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
                                                          
2 The sole allegation under Guideline C alleged that Applicant “exercised [his] Iraqi citizenship by 
possessing an Iraqi passport issued on July 05, 2007, with an expiration date of July 04, 2015.” The SOR 
failed to allege Applicant’s prior Iraqi military service. As a result, it was not considered under the 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 10. This service will be considered under the Whole-Person Concept 
section, below. 
 
7 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant’s wife, daughter, brother, and older sister are U.S. citizens and reside 
in the United States. His parents and younger sister are Iraqi citizens and reside in the 
United States. His mother-in-law is his only relative that remains in Iraq. She is elderly, 
ailing, and Applicant has had no contact with her for five years. He also had a friend in 
Iraq, although they have not communicated in several years. Due to his wife’s ties to her 
mother, and the terrorist threats present in Iraq as set out in HE II, a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion is present. Her 
presence in Iraq creates a potential conflict of interest. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
 Applicant has actually been placed in the position of having to choose between 
the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S., as a consequence of his choice to serve the U.S. Army as a linguist. At 
great risk to his family, he has repeatedly chosen the United States. The insurgents in 
Iraq threatened him and destroyed his home. Subsequently, he moved his family to the 
United States and they have assimilated into American culture. He owns a home here, 
and is raising his daughter as an American. He wishes to serve the Army further 
through his unique skills, despite periodically placing his life at risk due to hostile fire. He 
is trusted by those with whom he has served with and is considered to be an asset. His 
honorable service to the U.S. leaves no question that Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8 (b) mitigates all 
Foreign Influence concerns. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
8 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated 12 delinquent debts. They have been delinquent since 
late 2014 or early 2015. These debts establish both a history of delinquencies and an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy his obligations. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following provides mitigation: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused by unemployment and compounded 
by his and his wife’s costly emergency surgeries. These are circumstances beyond his 
control. Despite his financial difficulties, he resolved $120,000 in medical bills, made 
payment arrangements with his mortgage holder to rehabilitate his mortgage, and 
resolved one other debt in full. As soon as he acquired a full-time position, he 
contracted with a debt consolidation firm to manage his unresolved debts. The debt 
management company is negotiating with his creditors and he will make his first 
payment under the plan in January 2016. He has sufficient funds to afford the payment 
plan. While not all of his debts are resolved, he is acting responsibly with respect to his 
debts.  Applicant’s indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security concerns with respect to his financial 
delinquencies are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although this case pertains to 
Guidelines B, C, and F, the security concerns do not arise from any questionable 
conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that warrant further analysis. First, there 
is a significant risk of terrorism and various human rights abuses in Iraq. More 
importantly for security purposes, terrorists in Iraq are hostile to the United States and 
actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could 
attempt to use Applicant’s mother-in-law to obtain such information. Second, he had 
numerous connections to Iraq before he immigrated to the United States. Following his 
birth, he spent his formative years there. He was educated at an Iraqi university and 
served in the Iraqi Army. Third, he incurred a significant amount of delinquent debt since 
2014. 
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States since 2007. His 
spouse is also a naturalized citizen, as are his daughter, brother and one sister. He 
owns property here. In his position as a linguist, he has provided vital and direct support 
to the U.S. Armed Forces, sometimes under enemy fire. His home in Iraq was 
destroyed by insurgents, but he chose to continue to support U.S. forces. His ties to the 
United States are much stronger than his ties to his mother-in-law who remains in Iraq. 
There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm 
to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously. He has worked 
diligently for a defense contractor for several years in an important capacity. His 
supervisors assess him as loyal, trustworthy, and responsible, giving him excellent 
evaluations and praising his dedication to the cause of freedom in Iraq. There is no 
derogatory information about him in the record, other than potentially his financial 
difficulties, which he is addressing responsibly.  
 
The Appeal Board noted in ISCR Case No. 05-03846 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006) as 
follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
 
10 
 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s 
assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report a 
foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.3 Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude he met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guidelines for foreign preference, foreign influence, and 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.b through 2.h:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a through 3.l:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 I conclude that the whole-person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security clearance. 
Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions articulated under 
AG ¶¶ 8, 10 and 20 do not apply and severs any consideration of them; I conclude the whole-person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
