 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00918 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael Lambert, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 11, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On August 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated August 11, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 31, 2015. On September 11, 2015, 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on October 19, 2015. The case was assigned to me on October 26, 2015. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on October 28, 2015, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 19, 2015. 
 
 During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 4) and five 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE E) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and four witnesses testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 2, 
2015. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took 
advantage of that opportunity. She timely submitted a number of documents, which 
were marked as AE F through AE H and admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record closed on December 9, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with a detailed explanation, the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶ 1.a.). Applicant’s answers 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a 
systems engineer since June 1999.2 She is a May 1978 high school graduate with a 
December 1982 bachelor’s degree in an unspecified discipline.3 She has held a secret 
security clearance since November 1980.4 She has never served with the U.S. military.5 
Applicant was married in August 1980.6 She has one son, born in 1993.7 
 
  
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11. 
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 26-27. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 14-15. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant and her husband purchased a small business franchise in 2000, and 
he has continued to operate the business while Applicant was not involved in the 
business and retained her full-time position with her employer. They opened a business 
line of credit for $35,000, with Applicant co-signing the loan.8 The line of credit was used 
over the years, and her husband made routine monthly payments without any 
delinquencies. The business thrived and was operating at a profit until the national 
economy collapsed and devastated the business in 2008. Sales fell approximately 50 
percent virtually overnight. He estimated that he could have absorbed losses of up to 20 
percent. He downsized his workspace, workforce, and inventories with the hope of 
making it through the downturn. Applicant’s husband managed to keep making monthly 
payments to vendors and creditors for several months, but there were insufficient 
revenues to keep up with his obligations. At that point, Applicant’s husband informed 
her of the problem.9 He contacted his vendors and creditors and explained the 
circumstances as well as his hope to be able to continue the business. Most creditors 
and vendors understood the problems and extended longer periods to enable the 
company to stay afloat. Those companies who agreed to work with him were eventually 
rewarded with continued payments until the accounts were resolved. 
One company, the bank that issued the line of credit, refused to extend any 
leniency. It demanded immediate payment in full and refused to accept any proposed 
repayment plans. Instead, the bank charged off the remaining balance.10 In 2011, the 
same year the lending bank was absorbed into another nationwide bank, Applicant and 
her husband were notified that the new bank had filed suit against them. They were 
never notified of the court date, and were not present when the case was heard. A 
default judgment was apparently entered against them in 2011 awarding the new bank 
$50,016, including principal, interest, and costs.11 It is the basis for the allegations in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant and her husband were not notified of the judgment until 
approximately one year later. No efforts were made by either bank to collect the 
judgment. 
Applicant’s husband’s company eventually started to improve financially, and by 
2012, was once again profitable. Applicant and her husband set up a plan of action, and 
they started saving money to place in a separate money-market fund with the intent of 
paying off their debt.12 In 2014, her husband again made numerous attempts to contact 
the new bank in an effort to resolve the debt. Noone at the new bank had any 
knowledge of the loan. Applicant’s husband hired an attorney to assist them in resolving 
                                                          
8
 GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 12, 2014), at 10, 13; 
GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 11, 2015), at 5; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 22, 
2014), at 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 11, 2015, at 1-2. 
 
9
 Tr. at 37-41. 
 
10
 GE 3, supra note 8, at 10; GE 4, supra note 8, at 5. 
 
11
 GE 2, supra note 8, at 3; GE 3, supra note 8, at 10, 13; GE 4, supra note 8, at 5. 
 
12
 Tr. at 42, 53. 
 
4 
                                      
 
the debt, but he too had no success.13 Attorneys who represented both the original 
lending bank and the new bank could not, or would not, help resolve the issue.14 
Applicant’s attorney advised them that even if they paid the money to the clerk of the 
court, under state law, the judgment would not be satisfied unless and until someone 
representing the two banks is given authority to resolve the debt.15 The money-market 
fund that was set up currently has $47,337 in it simply awaiting distribution to the 
bank(s).16 
The business in question continues to grow and is again profitable. In 2014, it 
had estimated annual gross sales of $369,000.17 This year, he expects a profit of 
between $60,000 and $70,000.18 Opportunities to expand have not been undertaken 
because Applicant’s husband refuses to have Applicant co-sign another line of credit.19 
Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement which indicates a monthly net 
income of $11,350, total monthly expenses of $5,600, and payments on current 
financial obligations of $2,196. She has a monthly remainder of $3,554 available for 
discretionary saving or spending. Applicant and her husband also have retirement 
accounts worth $510,400.20 Other than the one judgment pertaining to the line of credit, 
Applicant and her husband have no delinquent debts.21 On November 10, 2015, 
Applicant’s two credit scores were reported as 809 and 812, both numbers considered 
as excellent.22 The judgment is no longer listed in Applicant’s November 2015 credit 
reports.23 
Work Performance and Character References 
 
 The department manager, who is also one of Applicant’s supervisors, has known 
Applicant since 1999. Applicant kept her apprised of the security clearance issue 
because it might affect her eligibility. Over the past 15 years, Applicant has received 
performance appraisals that were either “exceeds” or “far exceeds” for each period. She 
                                                          
13
 Tr. at 43-44. 
 
14
 AE A (E-mail Stream, various dates); AE B (E-mail Stream, various dates); Applicant’s Answer to the 
SOR, supra note 8, at 2. 
 
15
 Tr. at 45. 
 
16
 AE G (Account Statement, dated September 30, 2015); AE H (Account Statement, dated September 30, 
2015)’ Tr. at 46.  
 
17
 Tr. at 56. 
 
18
 Tr. at 57. 
 
19
 Tr. at 46-47. 
 
20
 AE F (Personal Financial Statement, dated December 1, 2015). 
 
21
 Tr. at 49. 
 
22
 AE C (Equifax Credit Report, dated November 10, 2015); AE D (TransUnion Credit Report, dated 
November 10, 2015). 
 
23
 See AE C, supra note 22; AE D, supra note 22. 
 
5 
                                      
 
is considered a valuable member of the team, and has a reputation for honesty, 
integrity, and trustworthiness.24 The section manager/test director – a retired military 
officer – has worked with Applicant for over 16 years, since he was her hiring manager. 
He, too, was informed of her financial situation. Applicant holds a position of trust, and 
she reflects the employer’s highest values and ethics.25 The technical lead, who has 
also served for the last six years as Applicant’s immediate supervisor, characterized 
Applicant as an exceptional employee who is very honest and very open. Applicant 
informed him of the financial situation as well.26 
Policies 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
                                                          
24
 Tr. 23-27. 
 
25
 Tr. at 33-36. 
 
26
 Tr. at 29-31. 
 
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
 
6 
                                      
 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems arose in 2008 when her husband was 
unable to continue making monthly business payments to vendors and creditors, and a 
line of credit for which she had co-signed became delinquent. The remaining balance 
was charged off. The creditor subsequently filed a law suit against Applicant and her 
husband, and a default judgment was entered against them in 2011. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”33  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending. The nature, frequency, and recency 
of Applicant’s financial difficulties were infrequent, if not actually isolated, and it 
occurred under such unusual circumstances when the entire national economy was 
devastated, that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s husband operated a thriving business, 
                                                          
33
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
operating at a profit, when his sales plummeted approximately 50 percent virtually 
overnight. Applicant’s only relationship to the business was as an uninvolved co-owner 
who had previously co-signed the line of credit application. Applicant’s husband finally 
confided to her the pending problems when he reached the point where he could no 
longer maintain his routine monthly payments.  
 
Applicant’s husband contacted his vendors and creditors and explained the 
circumstances as well as his hope to be able to continue the business. Most debtors 
and vendors agreed to work with him and those accounts were eventually resolved. The 
creditor that issued the line of credit refused, and it demanded immediate payment in 
full and refused to accept any proposed repayment plans. The creditor charged off the 
remaining balance, and it subsequently obtained a default judgment in 2011. No efforts 
were made by the creditor to collect the judgment. Nevertheless, Applicant and her 
husband set up a plan of action, and they started saving money to place in a fund with 
the intent of paying off their debt.  
 
Numerous attempts were made by Applicant’s husband and their attorney to 
contact the creditor in an effort to resolve the debt. Noone at the creditor had any 
knowledge of the loan. Attorneys for the creditor could not, or would not, help resolve 
the issue. Applicant’s attorney advised them that even if they paid the money to the 
clerk of the court, under state law, the judgment would not be satisfied unless and until 
someone representing the two banks is given authority to resolve the debt. The money-
market fund that was set up currently has $47,337 in it simply awaiting distribution to the 
creditor. 
The business continues to grow and is again profitable. In 2014, it had estimated 
annual gross sales of $369,000, and this year, Applicant’s husband expects a profit of 
between $60,000 and $70,000. Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement indicates a 
monthly remainder of $3,554 available for discretionary saving or spending. Applicant 
and her husband also have retirement accounts worth $510,400. Other than the one 
judgment pertaining to the line of credit, Applicant and her husband have no delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s credit scores were reported as 809 and 812. The judgment is no 
longer listed in Applicant’s November 2015 credit reports.  
Applicant’s financial problems would be resolved by now if the attorneys 
representing the creditor, or the other employees or representatives of the creditor, 
would simply locate their file and accept Applicant’s tendered payment. Their refusal, 
under these circumstances, was substantially beyond his control. Applicant and her 
husband have a fund simply awaiting notice from the creditor that a transfer can be 
accepted. At that point the matter will be resolved. Penalizing Applicant for the creditor’s 
failure or refusal to act – to accept a payment – would be fundamentally unfair. There 
are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control, and in fact, no 
longer exist. Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances confronting her, do not cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.34 
                                                          
34
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.35       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. By co-signing a 
line of credit, Applicant became legally obligated should there be a default on the line of 
credit by the other co-signer, her husband. When they were unable to continue making 
the normal monthly payments, the account was placed for placed for collection, charged 
off, and eventually it went to judgment.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has an outstanding reputation in the workplace. She was merely a supportive 
spouse who co-signed for a line of credit for their business. She had her own full-time 
job while her husband operated the business. Applicant’s husband operated a thriving 
business, operating at a profit, when his sales plummeted approximately 50 percent 
virtually overnight, in large measure because of the havoc caused by the faltering 
national economy. Business eventually improved, and it is now profitable once again. 
The fund has $47,337 in it simply awaiting distribution to the creditor, but the creditor 
has failed or refused to take any positive action to accept the money to resolve the 
account. Applicant has a significant amount of money available each month for 
discretionary saving or spending. She has no other delinquent debts. Her credit rating is 
over 800. Her financial problems no longer exist. Her actions under the circumstances 
confronting her do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
                                                          
35
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 36 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extraordinary track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts. Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
    
  
                                                          
36
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
