 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11701 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. McKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Allegations from Applicant’s contentious child-custody litigation, two minor 
criminal offenses, and his failure to provide accurate and complete information on his 
May 21, 2008 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) 
among other conduct-related issues raised personal conduct security concerns. 
However, personal conduct concerns are mitigated because they are not substantiated 
or are not recent. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2008, Applicant submitted his SF 86. (GE 1) On January 28, 2013, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On March 19, 2013, the DOD Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received 
Applicant’s SOR response, and Applicant requested a hearing. (HE 3) On April 16, 
2013, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On 
April 23, 2013, the case was assigned to me. On May 1, 2013, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the hearing for May 30, 2013. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered six exhibits, and Applicant offered four exhibits. 
(Tr. 22, 50; GE 1-6; AE A-D) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-6 and AE 
A-D. (Tr. 22-23, 51-53) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s 
response to the SOR. (HE 1-3) On June 10, 2013, I received the transcript of the 
hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted with explanations the underlying factual 
predicate for all of the SOR allegations. (HE 3) He denied that he intended or attempted 
to conceal anything from the Government. (HE 3) He also provided extenuating and 
mitigating information. (HE 3) He denied that the allegations raised or established 
security concerns. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old welder employed by a defense contractor. (Tr. 7; GE 1) 
His income is $60,000 to $80,000 per year. (Tr. 111) In 2001, he graduated from high 
school, and he has about three semesters of college. His courses focused on 
engineering. (Tr. 7-9) He served in the Marine Corps from 2001 to 2004 for a total of 39 
months. (Tr. 9) He served one full tour and one partial tour in Iraq.  
 
In 2003, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment for failure to obey an order 
concerning wearing earrings while on leave; and for being late for work after he returned 
from leave. (Tr. 79-83; SOR ¶ 1.f)  
  
Applicant’s specialty in the Marine Corps was metal working or welding. In March 
2004, Applicant was on his second tour in Iraq. (Tr. 98) He was working 17 to 18 hours 
a day. (Tr. 99) He was exhausted from excessive work and attempting to meet his 
responsibilities. (Tr. 98) Someone told a lie to the first sergeant about him, and he was 
placed on extra duty. (Tr. 99) He was also going through a divorce. (Tr. 100) He went to 
a psychiatrist in Iraq because he was cracking or decompensating under the strain. (Tr. 
100) He was medically evacuated from Iraq back to his home base in the United States. 
(Tr. 100-102) He received some anger management and alcohol abuse counseling. (GE 
3 at 4) Shortly thereafter, Applicant was honorably discharged from the Marine Corps 
for personality disorder or unsuitability. (Tr. 9, 102-106)1 He believed he was diagnosed 
with post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). (GE 3 at 4) He did not apply for a disability 
                                            
1 Applicant thought a meeting with the chain of command to discuss his discharge was actually a 
court-martial. (Tr. 102-106) His evident lack of understanding of legal matters contributed to his failure to 
provide complete and accurate information on his May 21, 2008 SF 86.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
rating from the Department of Veterans Affairs because he did not want a “crutch.” (Tr. 
106) He did not receive any post-service mental health counseling or psychiatric or 
anxiety medication. (Tr. 106-107)   
 
In 2007, Applicant and his first spouse were arguing. (Tr. 72) His spouse started 
swinging at Applicant, and he grabbed and held her. (Tr. 72) Later, Applicant and his 
spouse reconciled. (Tr. 72-75) Several months later, Applicant became upset that she 
was running around on him, and he took their son and left. (Tr. 75) She made a claim of 
domestic violence based on the incident several months previously where he grabbed 
her, and she obtained a restraining order. (Tr. 74-75; SOR ¶ 1.d) The police took 
Applicant’s son away from Applicant and gave his son to his spouse. (Tr. 74-75) His 
spouse was a stripper. Applicant asked her to leave that employment, and she refused. 
(Tr. 75-76) Gradually, Applicant received greater custody rights from the court until he 
received sole custody of his son. (Tr. 76-77) His relationship with his former spouse is 
currently amicable, and he allows her to visit her son. (Tr. 78)     
 
In 2007, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct for public urination. (Tr. 
79) The charge was dismissed. (Tr. 79) 
  
Applicant and his spouse have been living together for four years and married for 
two years. (Tr. 56) His current spouse has two children from a prior marriage. (Tr. 56) 
Applicant has one child from a prior marriage, and one child with his current spouse. 
(Tr. 56) All four children live with Applicant and his spouse. (Tr. 57) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c allege that Applicant was charged in November 2008 and 
December 2008 with trespassing on private property and in August 2010, he was 
charged with electronic mail harassment. Applicant’s spouse’s former husband was 
attempting to re-establish his relationship with Applicant’s spouse. (Tr. 58) Applicant’s 
spouse’s former husband’s mother (M) harassed Applicant and his spouse because 
Applicant’s spouse would not leave Applicant. (Tr. 58-59) Applicant filed charges of 
harassment against M, and M retaliated with false charges and allegations against 
Applicant. (Tr. 54-71) He went to court a dozen times to address M’s allegations. (Tr. 
60) Ultimately, all charges were dismissed. (Tr. 61-62)  
 
Applicant and his spouse received sole custody of their four children. (Tr. 62-63) 
Currently, there are contempt of court papers filed by Applicant and his spouse pending 
against M because she kept her grandchildren and would not bring them back to 
Applicant and his spouse on time. (Tr. 63-64) Applicant does not communicate with his 
spouse’s former husband and M except in family court. (Tr. 67) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k alleges that Applicant failed to tell his facility security officer (FSO) 
about court orders in November 2008 and December 2008 alleging Applicant 
trespassed on private property, and in August 2010, he was charged with electronic 
mail harassment. (Tr. 32; GE 5) Applicant’s FSO said Applicant told his FSO about 
going to court for disputes involving his spouse. (Tr. 32-33) Applicant did not necessarily 
provide documentation from the court or the specifics of particular court hearings. (Tr. 
32-33) Applicant’s FSO did not ask for documentation, and after Applicant came back 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
from court, Applicant would describe the status of this case. (Tr. 34) His FSO did not 
believe that Applicant ever withheld requested information or was deceptive about his 
situation with his former spouse. (Tr. 34-35) Applicant was in court six weeks before his 
hearing on custody issues, and Applicant expects to be back in court in another month. 
(Tr. 108) Applicant represents himself in family court. (Tr. 109) 
 
On his May 21, 2008 SF 86, Applicant disclosed the following information of 
possible security concern: (1) he received mental health treatment from a Navy 
specialist from 2001 to 2004; (2) he left employment three times under allegations of 
unsatisfactory performance or under unfavorable conditions; (3) he received nonjudicial 
punishment in 2003; (4) he used marijuana weekly from September 2004 to June 2006; 
(5) he had delinquent debts; and (6) he was immersed in child custody litigation with his 
former spouse. (GE 1) 
 
When Applicant completed his May 21, 2008 SF 86, he denied that he had been 
charged with any offense in the last seven years. (Tr. 87; GE 1; SOR ¶ 1.g) For the May 
2007 disorderly conduct, Applicant believed he did not have to disclose it because it 
was nolle prossed—dismissal of the charges to him meant there were no charges. (Tr. 
89-90) Applicant conceded he was wrong for not reporting the disorderly conduct 
charge on his SF 86. (Tr. 90) In regard to the September 2007 civil domestic violence 
order, Applicant was never charged. (Tr. 88)  
 
When Applicant responded to the illegal drug use question on his May 21, 2008 
SF 86, he disclosed his extensive marijuana use, but failed to disclose his three-time 
use of ecstasy. (Tr. 90; GE 1; SOR ¶ 1.h) He volunteered to an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator the he used ecstasy on three occasions from October 
2005 to January 2006 in his July 29, 2008 OPM personal subject interview (PSI). (GE 3 
at 6-7) During the same OPM PSI, he admitted that he associated with drug users; 
however, at his hearing, he said he no longer does so. (Tr. 87; SOR ¶ 1.j)  
 
In his July 29, 2008 OPM PSI, Applicant described very heavy involvement with 
marijuana for several years, including distribution of marijuana. (GE 3 at 5-6) His OPM 
PSI thoroughly describes multiple areas of security concern. (GE 3)   
 
When Applicant completed his May 21, 2008 SF 86, he disclosed he was 
involved in a child custody lawsuit; however, he did not disclose the September 2007 
civil domestic violence order. (Tr. 91; GE 1; SOR ¶ 1.i) Applicant was unsure of his 
rationale for not disclosing the domestic violence order at the time he completed his SF 
86; however, he thought he did not disclose it because it was dismissed. (Tr. 92) He 
may also have failed to disclose the order because he believed it was without merit. (Tr. 
92) 
 
Applicant said he respected the Government’s right to ask for personal 
information as part of a security investigation. (Tr. 93-94) He promised to carefully and 
fully answer all questions. (Tr. 93-94)  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
After 2007, Applicant changed. (Tr. 85) He accepted responsibility for his family, 
and he improved his work habits. (Tr. 85, 96) He stopped using marijuana. His ongoing 
struggle with M and his former spouse regarding custody issues have been a huge 
drain on Applicant’s morale and wellbeing. (Tr. 85-86) He loves his work and is 
optimistic about his future. (Tr. 96-97) He wants to support his family and his employer. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s FSO retired from the Army after 30 years of service as a sergeant 
major. (Tr. 39, 42-47) His FSO has had daily contact with Applicant for three years. (Tr. 
24-25, 39-41) Applicant performs a variety of tasks as a fabricator and welder with 
layouts, computers, and blueprints. (Tr. 25, 28, 30) Applicant has a commercial driver’s 
license. (Tr. 110) He has an excellent reputation with customers; he is a fine union 
steward; and he works well with colleagues. (Tr. 28, 30-31) Applicant’s “work ethic is 
outstanding.” (Tr. 25) He has improved his abilities through training; he shows initiative; 
and he is reliable, diligent, trustworthy, honest, and responsible. (Tr. 26-27, 37-38) 
Applicant would have been promoted to foreman, if he had a security clearance. (Tr. 29) 
 
 Applicant’s friend of eight years describes Applicant as honest and generous. 
(AE A) Applicant is more mature and responsible now. (AE A) He recommends 
reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. (AE A) Two neighbors, who have known 
Applicant for thirty years, depict Applicant as a respectful, diligent, and loyal family man. 
(AE B-C) He received an April 28, 2013 letter of appreciation for his contributions to his 
employer supporting troops with better more survivable equipment. (AE D)   
 
 During his Marine Corps service, Applicant was awarded the Combat Action 
Ribbon, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Sea Service Deployment 
Ribbon, National Defense Service Medal, Presidential Unit Citation, Letter of 
Appreciation, and Good Conduct Medal. (GE 6) 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
   
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Five personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those five disqualifying conditions provide:   
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,   
. . . [to] determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness; 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to [a] . . . security official, or other official government 
representative;2 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply. The Government produced sufficient evidence to 
meet the substantial evidence threshold that Applicant failed to provide required 
information on his May 21, 2008 SF 86. He failed to disclose: the restraining orders and 
charges arising from his custody litigation; his ecstasy use on three occasions; and his 
arrest or charge for disorderly conduct. His FSO provided a letter stating that Applicant 
failed to fully disclose information about his custody litigation.  
 
The Government presented substantial evidence of court orders and charges 
arising from his custody litigation, his nonjudicial punishment in January 2003, and his 
association with drug users, and he failed to keep his FSO fully informed of the status of 
his family court litigation. AG ¶ 16(d) applies. AG ¶ 16(c) does not apply because there 
is sufficient credible adverse information under the other cited disqualifying conditions 
for an adverse determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies. There is substantial evidence that Applicant engaged in 
conduct which adversely affects his personal, professional, and community standing. 
Further analysis concerning applicability of mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) applies to the restraining orders and charges arising from Applicant’s 
child custody litigation. The family court has been working with Applicant, his family, and 
his former spouse and her family for five years. The family court resolved the charges 
and counter charges and awarded Applicant and his spouse full custody of the two 
children from Applicant’s former spouse’s marriage.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 17(f) applies to the allegations that Applicant did not provide full and 
complete information on his May 21, 2008 SF 86. Applicant disclosed that he: (1) 
received mental health treatment from a Navy specialist from 2001 to 2004; (2) left 
employment three times under allegations of unsatisfactory performance or under 
unfavorable conditions; (3) received nonjudicial punishment in 2003; (4) used marijuana 
weekly from September 2004 to June 2006; (5) had delinquent debts; and (6) was 
immersed in child custody litigation with his former spouse. His disclosure of the 
custody litigation was sufficient to place the Government on notice of this area for 
further inquiry and investigation. He is unsophisticated about legal matters, and he did 
not understand the necessity or requirements for disclosure of his disorderly conduct 
because the charge was dismissed and specific information about the custody related 
litigation. Compared to hundreds of uses of marijuana, his three-time ecstasy use was 
apparently overlooked.     
 
AG ¶ 17(a) applies to Applicant’s failure to disclose his ecstasy use on his SF 86. 
During his July 29, 2008 OPM PSI, he described his extensive marijuana involvement 
and later during the interview mentioned his three-time ecstasy use. The only evidence 
of Applicant’s ecstasy use was Applicant’s admission during his OPM PSI.  
 
AG 17(f) applies to Applicant’s failure to fully disclose information to his FSO and 
his association with drug users that he described in his OPM PSI. Applicant’s FSO 
explained that Applicant told him when he was going to court for custody issues and he 
was aware of the charges and counter charges. Applicant provided documentation upon 
request about the litigation. Applicant ended his association with drug users. 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) mitigates the security concern raised under AG ¶ 16(e). I do not 
believe Applicant could be coerced or pressured into release of classified information by 
threats of public disclosure of his history of involvement with the family court, allegations 
of falsification of his SF 86, history of illegal drug use, or disorderly conduct charge.   
 
AG ¶ 17(d) applies. Applicant acknowledged all of his misbehavior in his OPM 
PSI and at his hearing. The most recent conduct in the SOR, aside from the complaints 
and counter complaints arising from the child custody litigation, is in 2008, more than 
four years ago. Applicant has changed and matured. He is a responsible employee and 
family man. He has taken “positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” Personal conduct concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant provided sufficient information to refute most of the SOR allegations. 
He did not intentionally attempt to deceive the Government about matters of security 
concern. He credibly promised to be very careful and thorough when completing future 
SF 86. The allegations of M are not substantiated. The family court did not credit her 
allegations, and Applicant and his spouse have sole custody of Applicant spouse’s 
children from her previous marriage. His 2007 charge of disorderly conduct was 
dismissed and is stale. Applicant sees his FSO every workday, and he has a good 
relationship with his FSO. He will keep his FSO informed of matters of possible security 
concern. Applicant ended his marijuana involvement several years ago, and he no 
longer associates with drug users. 
 
Applicant served honorably in the Marine Corps, including combat service in Iraq. 
After leaving the Marine Corps, he abused marijuana and was irresponsible for a time. 
He married his current spouse and is now a responsible family man, who is dedicated to 
the welfare of his children. He is a diligent and trustworthy employee, who contributes to 
his employer and the national defense. He has alleviated all personal conduct concerns.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude personal conduct concerns 
are mitigated, and he is eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
