 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07153 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ernst M. Martzen, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant had nine 
collection accounts and one charged-off account which totaled approximately $26,000. 
Half of the unresolved debt resulted from a repossessed automobile. She has paid or 
resolved approximately $8,000 of the debt and disputed approximately $19,000 of the 
debt. She has resolved the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on September 5, 
2012, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On September 28, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. On January 9, 2013, I was assigned the case. On February 5, 
2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
for the hearing convened on February 25, 2013. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 
1 through 15 and Applicant’s Exhibit A with attachments 1 through 25, without objection. 
Applicant testified at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional information. Additional material (Ex. B through D2) was submitted and 
admitted into the record without objection. On March 7, 2013, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she denied the majority of the SOR debts 
because they did not appear on her September 28, 2012, credit bureau report (CBR). 
She admitted her vehicle was voluntarily returned to the creditor (SOR 1.b). I 
incorporate Applicant’s admission as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old program manager who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 1998. She first received a secret clearance in 1998. (Tr. 29) 
Applicant has $92,000 in her retirement savings account. (Ex. B) Co-workers and 
supervisors state Applicant is responsible, dependable, trustworthy, reliable, quality-
focused, a team player, and a “go-getter.” (Ex. A-15, 16, 19, 20, and A26) She goes to 
great length to accomplish given tasks. She has received numerous awards for 
outstanding performance, exceptional performance, and achievement. (Ex. C) A 
coworker, a retired Air Force colonel with 27 ½ years service, spoke on Applicant’s 
behalf stating she was very capable and rates her in the top half of the people he has 
supervised. (Tr. 131)  
 
Applicant was married for ten years and had three boys. (Tr. 26) Her sons are 
now 30, 26, and 24 years of age. (Tr. 40) Two of her sons currently serve in the military. 
(Ex. A-19) Although the court ordered her ex-husband to pay child support when that 
marriage ended in May 1995, he did not do so. (Tr. 40) Several times she sought 
assistance from the state Attorney General to obtain child support. However, her ex-
husband worked construction and three or four months after the Attorney General was 
able to enforce the decree, her ex-husband would be laid off from work and the child 
support would end. (Tr. 41) She never received child support with any regular 
consistency. (Tr. 41) 
 
Applicant’s second marriage lasted a year-and-a-half, ending in June 2001. She 
and her husband opened an automotive body repair shop. (Tr.37) A year after marrying, 
her husband had a quadruple bypass operation that caused depression. (Tr 37, 151) 
The marriage ended because of the depression. Her ex-husband was to be responsible 
                                                          
2 The last material (Ex. D) was received on April 3, 2013.  
 
3 
 
for his debts, but failed to pay those debts. (Ex. A-26, Tr. 36) The divorce decree did not 
specifically list which debts each party was required to pay. (Tr. 37) The credit card debt 
(SOR 1.f, $6,373) was a credit card used by the repair shop and the telephone bill (SOR 
1.t, $1,818) was also for the repair shop. Applicant asserted, but provided no 
documentation, that she paid the settlement offer on the credit card obligation. (Tr. 58, 
86) Following her divorce, she married again for approximately two years. That 
marriage ended in October 2005. (Tr. 104)  
 
Applicant had cervical cancer and a complete hysterectomy. She also had rotator 
cuff surgery. (Tr. 46) Following Applicant’s hysterectomy surgery, she was release from 
the hospital and immediately started having congestive heart failure requiring additional 
treatment. She asserted she had been released from the hospital too soon following her 
surgery. She incurred medical bills including an emergency room bill, which the hospital 
said it would remove from her account. (Tr. 65) Applicant’s earlier CBRs list 14 medical 
accounts, which were not alleged to be delinquent, charged-off, or in collection, but 
merely unpaid. Applicant challenged the accounts, and they no longer appear on her 
most recent CBR. (Tr. 66, 103)  
 
In Applicant’s second marriage, they purchased a new truck for her husband and 
paid it off in two years. They then purchased a 2000 Pontiac Grand Prix intending to pay 
it off within two years. The amount borrowed was $27,000 with $503 monthly payments. 
(Tr. 108) However, the marriage ended and she was left with the $500 monthly 
payments, which she was unable to continue making. In 2006, she voluntarily returned 
the vehicle. Approximately $8,000 was realized from the resale of the vehicle and a debt 
of $13,575 (SOR 1.b) remained. (Ex. A-2) Applicant believes that only $4,000 is owed 
on the vehicle after it was sold. (Tr. 108) She attempted to work with a debt relief firm to 
resolve this debt, but the creditor refused to adjust the debt. (Ex. A-20, Tr. 49, 50) 
Following the hearing, she again contacted the creditor attempting to resolve this 
obligation. (Ex. D-1, D-2) Applicant believes she owes $4,000 and is willing to pay that 
amount. (Tr. 51) She also stated she would pay the full amount if the creditor confirmed 
the amount was correct. (Tr. 118)  
 
Applicant remarried and began paying off past debts. (Tr. 26, 43) In October 
2011, her husband broke his back. (Tr.42) He had a vertebra shattered and his sciatic 
nerve crushed. (Tr. 43) He has had two back surgeries and will have another in the next 
couple of months. (Tr. 42) He also suffers from emphysema, depression, and an anxiety 
disorder, agoraphobia.3 (Tr. 42) Her husband’s income went from $77,000 annually to 
$30,000 annually from workman’s compensation. (Tr. 44) The workman’s compensation 
claim was approved ten days before the hearing, and the first payment was not yet 
received at the time of the hearing. 
 
                                                          
3 Agoraphobia is an anxiety disorder characterized by anxiety in situations where the sufferer perceives 
the environment as being difficult to escape or get help. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s 2005 Dodge pick-up truck is paid for. (Tr. 45) She obtained a credit 
card with a $300 limit and obtained a small credit union loan to help rebuild her credit. 
Her credit rating has gone from the 400’s to near 700. (Tr. 46)  
 
Some of the accounts are duplications. SOR 1.m ($218), SOR 1.p ($218), and 
SOR 1.v ($218) are the same obligation. SOR 1.e and SOR 1.s are the same cable bill. 
Applicant disputes seven accounts: SOR 1.b ($13,575, vehicle repossession), SOR 1.e 
($358, cable bill), SOR 1.g ($134, CD/DVD club), SOR 1.i ($2,054, rent), SOR 1.k 
($1,065, emergency room service), SOR 1.t, ($1,818 ex-husband’s cell phone account), 
and SOR 1.w ($164, 20-year-old account). Applicant has received two earlier SORs. 
She asserts that the debts listed on those SORs, which are not on her current SOR, 
have been paid.  
 
A summary of Applicant’s charged-off and collection accounts and the status of 
each follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Unpaid medical account. $104 Paid. Government concedes it has been 
paid. (Tr. 78) 
b Repossession of a 2000 
Pontiac automobile 
collection account. (Tr. 
107)  
 
$13,575 
 
Disputed. Creditor is unwilling to adjust 
the debt. Applicant believes she owes 
$4,000 on the debt and is willing to pay 
that amount. (Tr. 53) 
c Unpaid medical account. $80 Paid. (Ex. A-3) 
d Unpaid medical account. $109 Paid. (Ex. A-9, Tr. 54) 
e 2005 cable provider 
collection account. (Tr. 
112) 
$358 Disputed. Applicant returned the cable 
company’s equipment, but was never 
credited with the return. (Tr. 55) She 
has disputed this debt. (Ex. A-13)  
f Charged-off account. 
Creditor offered to settle 
for $1,000 on a balance 
of $1,900. (Ex. A-4) 
$6,373 This credit card was used by the auto 
body shop. (Tr. 38) Applicant asserts 
she paid the settlement offer, but 
provided no documentation. (Tr. 58, 86)  
g Collection for a CD/DVD 
or video program.  
$143 Disputed. Applicant was never in a CD 
or video program. There have been 
numerous complaints about this music 
club for services never ordered or 
received. (Ex. A-5)  
h Unpaid medical account. $37 Resolved. (Ex. A-6, Tr. 62)  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
i Collection account for 
rent.  
$2,054 Disputed. Applicant had a six-month 
lease. (Tr.93) When the ownership of 
the apartments changed, the company 
went to one-year leases. (Tr. 62) The 
new company asserted she owed three 
months of rent. She challenged the debt 
and it no longer appears on her CBR. 
(Tr. 63)  
j Unpaid medical 
account. 
$63 Paid in December 2009. (Ex. 7)  
11k Unpaid medical 
account. 
 
 
 
$1,065 Disputed. This was emergency room 
treatment following her release from the 
hospital after her hysterectomy surgery. 
After disputing the bill, the hospital said 
they would remove from her account. 
(Tr. 65, 66) 
12l Unpaid medical 
account. 
 
$31 
 
CBR has no contact information for this 
creditor. (Tr. 66) 
13m Unpaid medical 
account.  
$218 
 
Paid in September 2009. (Ex. A-8, Tr. 
68) Duplicated debt. This is the same 
obligation as SOR 1. p and SOR 1. v.) 
14n Unpaid medical 
account. 
 
$29 CBR has no contact information for this 
creditor. (Tr. 66) 
15o Bank collection account. $1,079 Resolved. (Tr. 70)  
16p Unpaid medical 
account. 
 
$218 
 
Duplicate debt. Same debt as SOR 1.m 
and 1.v. Paid in September 2009. (Ex. 
A-8, Tr. 68) 
17q Unpaid medical 
account.  
 
$149 
 
Paid. (Ex. A-12, Tr. 70) 
18r Unpaid medical 
account. 
$85 
 
? 
 
6 
 
19s Cable collection 
account. 
 
 
$61 
 
Duplicate debt. Applicant asserts this 
and the cable bill listed at SOR 1.e are 
the same obligation. (Tr. 73) 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
20t Telephone service 
collection account. 
$1,818 
 
Disputed. Account is 16 years old and 
belongs to Applicant’s ex-husband. (Tr. 
73, 113) The divorce decree required 
her ex-husband to pay his debts, but did 
not specifically list each debt to be paid. 
She disputed the debt and it was 
removed from her CBR. (Ex. A. 14) 
21u Collection account. $394 CBR does not have valid contact 
information for this creditor. (Tr. 75) 
22v Unpaid medical 
account. 
 
$218 Duplicate debt. Same debt as SOR 1.m 
and 1.p. Paid in September 2009. (Ex. 
A-8, Tr. 68) 
23w Collection account . $164 Disputed. Item purchased 20 years ago 
and returned. (Tr. 77, 113) After 
returning the merchandize, she never 
received any debt notice from creditor.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
7 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 
8 
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had one charged-off 
account and nine collection accounts, which totaled more than $26,000. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by her 
failed marriages, her ex-husband’s failed business, and her current husband’s injuries. 
She never received the court-ordered child support awarded her in her first divorce. In 
her second marriage, her husband opened an automotive repair shop. Her second 
husband’s quadruple bypass operation caused depression that ended the marriage. Her 
ex-husband failed to pay the marital debts he was responsible for, which included the 
$1,818 (SOR 1.t) telephone bill for the repair shop and the $6,373 credit card debt 
(SOR 1.f).  
 
 
9 
 
During Applicant’s second marriage, they paid off her ex-husband’s truck and 
started making payments on her car loan, intending to pay it off within two years. After 
the divorce, the car was voluntarily repossessed leaving a $13,575 debt (SOR 1.b). 
Applicant asserts she owes some amount on this debt, but believes the amount to be 
$4,000. If the entire amount is owed, she will pay it.  
 
Following Applicant’s most recent marriage, she started to address her past-due 
debts and was making progress on those debts until October 2011, when her husband 
broke his back. His income decreased from $77,000 annually to $30,000 annually from 
workman’s compensation. The workman’s compensation claim was approved just prior 
to the hearing and the first check had not yet been received.  
 
Applicant had cervical cancer and a complete hysterectomy. She also had rotator 
cuff surgery. Applicant’s earlier CBRs list 14 medical accounts, which she challenged 
and they no longer appear on her most recent CBR. Although listed as unpaid, these 
accounts were never alleged to have been delinquent, charged-off, or in collection.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced both separation and divorce along with 
the financial burden associated with each, plus unexpected medical treatment. The 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances applies. She had started to address her past due debts when 
her current husband broke his back. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Applicant has paid or resolved nine of the debts: SOR 1.a ($104), SOR 1.c ($80), 
SOR 1.d ($109), SOR 1.f ($6,373), SOR 1.h ($37), SOR 1.j ($63), SOR 1.o ($1,079), 
SOR 1.q ($149), and SOR 1.w ($164). AG & 20(d) applies to these nine debts. 
  
Applicant disputes seven accounts. The vehicle repossession (SOR 1.b $13,575) 
occurred following her divorce and has been previously discussed. She disputes ever 
being a member of a CD/DVD club (SOR 1.g $134). She had a six-month lease and 
when the ownership of the apartment complex changed, the new owners claimed she 
owed three months’ rent for early termination of the lease. She disputed this debt (SOR 
1.i, $2,054). She disputed owing her ex-husband’s telephone account (SOR 1.w, 
$1,818) for the repair shop. She disputes a 20-year-old debt (SOR 1.w, $164) stating 
she returned the merchandise. She was charged for emergency room services when 
she had to return to the hospital following her surgery. She challenged the debt because 
the hospital had released her too soon resulting in her medical problems. After 
challenging this debt, it was removed from her CBR. She paid a number of these 
medical accounts and all 14 medical accounts have been removed from her CBR. 
 
Even without supporting documentation, Applicant’s disputes concerning the 
listed debts appear to be valid disputes. She agrees she owes something on the vehicle 
repossession and will pay the valid amount owed. She has not recently incurred any 
large debt. Except as previously listed, she is paying her debts. Her credit score is 
 
10 
 
improving. She is addressing her debts in a way that does not raise concerns about her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts were not incurred on 
luxuries; more than half the debts listed were for medical treatment. Approximately half 
of the total amount owed was due to a vehicle repossession. The vehicle was 
purchased when Applicant was married and there were two incomes to make the 
monthly payment. Her ability to repay the debt ended when her marriage ended. She 
agrees she owes something on this debt and merely disputes the amount. She will pay 
this debt. At the time of the car’s purchase, it was not a frivolous purchase or a luxury.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
11 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.w:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
