 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 10-08772   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
concerns raised by her history of excessive alcohol consumption and three convictions 
for driving under the influence. She remains on probation until October 2014. Clearance 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive,1 on October 4, 2012, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct 
guidelines. DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on January 3, 2013. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 11, 2013, but did not 
respond. Accordingly, the items appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 
2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 32, is an employee of a federal contractor. She is unmarried and has 
no children.2 The SOR raises concerns about Applicant’s alcohol use.  
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol at 15 years old. Her alcohol problems 
became acute after she enlisted in the Navy in June 2000. Applicant began drinking 
daily, consuming at least six beers and four shots of whiskey. She received her first 
conviction for driving under the influence (DUI) in October 2002. For unexplained 
reasons, it took Applicant six years to complete the conditions of her sentence. In July 
2003, Applicant was hospitalized for alcohol intoxication with a blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) of .27%. Shortly thereafter, her command referred her to a 
substance abuse rehabilitation program. Applicant reported to her substance abuse 
counselor (SAC) that in addition to the DUI and alcohol-related hospitalization, during 
the past year she had been sexually assaulted while intoxicated, used alcohol in 
conjunction with prescription narcotics, and experienced blackouts on at least four 
occasions. The SAC diagnosed Applicant as being alcohol dependent. Applicant failed 
the program because she did not attend Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings as 
required. As a result, the Navy administratively discharged Applicant in October 2003. 
According to the administrative separation report, Applicant failed to correct her 
behavior regarding alcohol consumption after three medical evaluations and two 
rehabilitation programs.3  
 
 After her discharge from the Navy, Applicant continued to consume alcohol to 
intoxication. In July 2004, she began working as a bartender. Oftentimes she drank 
during her shifts and continued drinking with co-workers after the bar closed. Her last 
two DUI arrests occurred after her bartending shift. In 2009, Applicant received her 
second DUI conviction (BAC 0.16%). Consequently, the court suspended Applicant’s 
license for one year. Eight months later, in April 2010, the police arrested Applicant after 
                                                          
2 GE 4. 
 
3 GE 5, 11.  
 
 
3 
 
she was involved in a one-car accident. Her BAC measured .22%. Applicant is on 
probation until October 2014.4  
 
 Applicant does not know if she is an alcoholic. Although she continues to 
consume alcohol, Applicant claims that she no longer drinks during her bartending 
shifts. She has no plans to abstain from alcohol use.5 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
                                                          
4 GE 5-10. 
 
5 GE 5.  
 
4 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
 Applicant’s history of excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern 
because it is direct evidence of her repeated “exercise of questionable judgment” and 
her “failure to control impulses.”6 Furthermore her alcohol history casts doubts on her 
current reliability and trustworthiness.7 Applicant is an alcoholic.  She was diagnosed 
with the condition in a U.S. Navy substance abuse program.8 Over the past 13 years, 
her alcoholism has resulted in her discharge from the Navy and three DUI convictions. 
She has demonstrated she is unable to restrain herself from drinking at work, or from 
engaging in dangerous and life-threatening conduct.9 None of the alcohol consumption 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has not acknowledged her alcohol problem. She 
continues to consume alcohol in complete disregard of the negative consequences of 
her alcohol dependence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
At this time, Applicant is not fit for access to classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s 
alcohol dependence issues are severe. Her conduct shows a pattern of poor judgment 
and disregard for the law. She has no insight into the consequences of her behavior and 
continues to consume alcohol. Applicant is not in a position to appreciate the destructive 
nature of her alcohol dependence, let alone the potential peril she inflicts on others. As 
long as Applicant’s alcohol dependence remains untreated, her ability to safeguard 
classified information or perform sensitive duties remains compromised.   
 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 21. 
 
7 AG ¶ 21. 
 
8 AG ¶ 22(e). 
 
9 AG ¶¶ 22(a) - (c).  
 
5 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent with national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
