 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08109 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 18, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling $406,353 and a 1997 Chapter 13 
bankruptcy that was dismissed in 1999. She provided documentation that shows she 
has made a payment on one debt and contested another debt. She failed to produce 
sufficient documentation that her remaining debts have been addressed or otherwise 
satisfied. She has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
                                                          
1 Two different versions of the SORs were initially sent to Applicant on July 25, 2012. On January 17, 
2013, the correct and final version of the SOR utilized in the case was resent to Applicant.  
 
2 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant’s answer to the Statement of Reasons (Answer) was dated February 
25, 2013. Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing in an email dated March 13, 2013. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on March 19, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was received by Applicant on April 11, 2013. She was afforded 30 
days to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. On June 3, 2013, Applicant submitted a nine page response (Response). 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s Response, although it was received 
after the 30 days afforded to her, and it was admitted into the record. The case was 
assigned to me on June 7, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. She is employed by a Defense contractor and has 
worked for her employer since April 2007. She is married. She has one adult child and 
two adult stepchildren. (Item 6.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
has made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified eight delinquent debts totaling $406,353 and a 1997 Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
that was dismissed in 1999. Applicant’s debts appear in credit reports entered into 
evidence. Applicant admitted each of the debts in her Answer, with explanations. 
(Answer; Items 8-11.)  
 
Applicant attributes her debts to a series of events beyond her control. In July 
2009, Applicant was injured at work. Worker’s compensation only paid her $12.25 an 
hour during the two months she was out of work. After returning to work, her schedule 
was reduced from full time to three days per week. As a result, Applicant fell behind on 
her mortgage and other bills. (Item 4.) Her debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $259 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a). This debt was for a cable bill that was placed with a collection agent. 
Applicant presented a copy of her bank statement that shows a payment to this creditor 
in the amount of $194.18, which was “pending” with her bank as of April 12, 2013. 
Applicant is working to resolve this debt. (Response.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $428 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b). In August 2012, Applicant retained a law firm to represent her in settling 
her debts. Applicant provided documentation that this debt was being handled by that 
law firm. However, there is no current evidence that this account is settled, being paid, 
or otherwise resolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $228 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant provided an email dated April 12, 2013, which documented a 
payment of $78.99 on an account ending in “0096.” Applicant claimed that this account 
was paid in full, however, Applicant owes more than one debt to this creditor and the 
account number on the credit report for this debt (207551) fails to match with the 
account number on the receipt. Applicant failed to introduce sufficient documentation 
that this debt is paid or is otherwise resolved. (Response; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $16,000 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d). This debt was for a second mortgage. Applicant provided an 
unsigned stipulation for entry of judgment and a proposed order, proposing to pay this 
creditor $100 per month beginning December 2012. The agreement called for payments 
to increase to $400 per month in April 2013. She presented no documentation that this 
agreement was adopted or that any payments have been made under this plan. This 
debt is not resolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $3,356 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant asserted in her Answer that this debt was being 
satisfied through payroll deductions. She provided pay statements that show automatic 
payroll deductions per “Agreement” of $154.36 on July 27, 2012; $174.59 on August 23, 
2012; $226.52 on September 9, 2012; $174.59 on September 20, 2012; $172.06 on 
October 4, 2012; $192.28 on October 18, 2012; $154.36 on November 1, 2012; $174.59 
on November 15, 2012; $154.36 on November 29, 2012; $174.58 on December 13, 
2013; $176.23 on December 27, 2012; and $203.74 on January 10, 2013. The pay 
statements fail to show to whom the payments were made. There is no documentary 
evidence of an agreement to pay this debt, or that established these payments were 
made to this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent mortgage loan in the amount of $384,000 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f). Applicant was unable to afford her mortgage payments after 
her on-the-job injury. She was advised the only way to obtain a modification on the 
mortgage loan was to “be three months late.” As a result of this advice, she became 
delinquent on the mortgage payments and pursued a modification with the lender. She 
was still attempting to negotiate a modification when the lender foreclosed upon the 
home in approximately November 2010. In August 2012 a law firm representing 
Applicant in this matter contacted this creditor in writing and disputed the debt under the 
state anti-deficiency law. Applicant provided documentation regarding this creditor’s 
alleged fraudulent mortgage lending practices. Applicant provided no documentation 
establishing this dispute has been resolved. (Item 4; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $1,423 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g). In August 2012, Applicant retained a law firm to represent her in 
settling her debts. Applicant provided documentation that this debt was being handled 
by the law firm. However, there is no current evidence that this account is settled, being 
paid, or otherwise resolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $659 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.h). In August 2012, Applicant retained a law firm to represent her in settling 
her debts. Applicant provided documentation that this debt was being handled by the 
law firm. However, there is no current evidence that this account is settled, being paid, 
or otherwise resolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May 1997 (as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.i). This petition was dismissed in May 1999. In addition, Applicant also identified that 
she filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May 2003, alleging $230,000 in debts. She withdrew 
that bankruptcy application three days after filing it. (Item 6; Item 10; Item 13.) 
 
 Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement indicated she had $1,721 available 
after paying her monthly living expenses. She also identified $250,000 in assets. Other 
than engaging a law firm to negotiate with her creditors, she presented no evidence that 
she has utilized credit counseling services. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant provided no additional evidence concerning the quality of her 
professional performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record 
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. 
She submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems since at least 1997, when she filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Recently, she has accumulated eight delinquent debts totaling 
$406,353. She has failed to satisfy the majority of these debts, despite having $1,721 
available each month after paying her living expenses. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
6 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence does not show that Applicant has fully resolved any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. She has one payment to a creditor pending, and the other debts are 
unresolved. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant explained in her Answer that she incurred 
debts as a result of medical problems and underemployment. These were 
circumstances beyond her control. However, to be fully applicable AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual demonstrate that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has the funds available to make payments on her debts, but 
failed to present substantiated proof that she has done so, with the exception of the one 
account with a payment pending. I am unable to make a determination that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant did not attend financial counseling. Although she hired a debt 
management firm to contact some of her creditors, there is no documentation to 
suggest they provided her financial counseling. Further, there is little indication that 
seven of Applicant’s eight delinquent accounts are being resolved or are under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her delinquent 
debts. While she hired a law firm to help her negotiate some of her debts in August 
2012, there was no evidence of any payments or progress toward the settlement of 
 
7 
 
these debts presented. The record fails to establish that any payments have been made 
on the majority of her SOR listed debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant presented evidence to show that she was in the process of formally 
disputing her $384,000 mortgage debt. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable, in part, to this debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant failed to address her financial delinquencies. While she has 
experienced events beyond her control that created a financial hardship, she now has a 
monthly surplus. She failed to use that surplus to address her delinquent obligations. 
Further, she has a history of delinquent debt dating back to 1997 and continuing to the 
present day. Accordingly, continuation of these circumstances is highly likely, and the 
potential for coercion, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
