KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: When examining an applicant’s intent the judge must consider applicants statements in
light of the record as a whole. The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s omissions were
motivated by an interest in avoiding embarrassment are sustainable on this record.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-08507.a1
DATE: 06/07/2013
DATE: June 7, 2013
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-08507
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Christopher Graham, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 13, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
1Applicant denied that she had committed the charged offenses.  This incident was not separately alleged in the
SOR.
2
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 8, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were supported by substantial record evidence, whether the Judge failed to consider significant
record evidence favorable to Applicant, and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline F, and a favorable
finding regarding one of the Guideline E allegations, are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
is employed by a Defense contractor.  She holds a bachelor’s degree as well as a master’s.  She
served in the Air Force for 25 years.  
In 2004, Applicant engaged in an altercation with her husband, who was having an
extramarital affair.  As a result of this altercation, Applicant was apprehended by the police and
charged with first degree assault, second degree assault, reckless endangerment, trespassing, and
malicious destruction of property.  She received probation before judgment and was fined $250.  The
Judge later expunged the offenses from her record.1
Applicant completed security clearance applications (SCAs) in 2007, 2009, and 2010.  Each
SCA inquired if, within the previous seven years, she had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket
to appear in court on criminal proceedings.  Each SCA stated that Applicant must list any offense,
even if it had been sealed, expunged, stricken from the court record, or even if the charges had been
dismissed.  On each SCA, Applicant omitted reference to the 2004 incident involving her husband.
In 2009, Applicant was interviewed by a security clearance investigator.  She denied the arrest.
Soon thereafter, she was re-interviewed and specifically asked about the 2004 arrest for assault.  She
acknowledged the arrest and discussed it completely.  
Applicant is “almost sure” she read the instruction on the SCAs before answering the
questions.  She regarded the incident as something she wanted to put behind her.  She was
embarrassed to reveal the incident to the Government.  She believed that Government agents would
tell others about it, which would be embarrassing.  She stated that she had experienced difficulties
in her life, including her divorce, the death of her brother, and the stress of graduate school.  She
stated that her attorney told her the incident was no longer in her record.  
3
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of her work and for her
trustworthiness and good judgment.  She has received performance awards and high performance
ratings.
The Judge’s Analysis 
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate.  He cited to her testimony
that she was embarrassed by the incident and no longer wanted to answer questions about it.  He
concluded that she did not omit the offenses because of a belief that they had been expunged.  He
noted that she did not admit the offense until confronted by the second interviewer.  In the whole-
person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant’s conduct indicated a willingness to put her interest
in avoiding embarrassment over the Government’s requirement for truthful information regarding
her  worthiness for a clearance.  The Judge concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the
security concerns arising from her omissions to her SCAs and to her interview.
Discussion
 
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that she had deliberately omitted her offenses from
the SCAs.  She argues that the Judge ignored her testimony that she had been told by a lawyer that
she did not have to mention the offenses.  She challenges the Judge’s finding that she had omitted
the offenses because of embarrassment.
In regard first to Applicant’s contention that the Judge ignored her testimony about the
expungement order and advice of counsel, we note that the Judge made findings about this evidence
and discussed these findings in the Analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the
Judge considered all of the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-01027 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 9,
2012). 
Regarding the challenged findings about the deliberate nature of the omissions, we examine
a Judge’s findings to determine if they are supported by substantial evidence, that is, “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No.11-00970 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012), quoting
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  When examining an applicant’s intent or state of mind, the Judge must
consider the applicant’s statements in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-
16743 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 11, 2007). 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant stated that the incident in question was “the most
embarrassing significant event of [her] life.”  Response to SOR, dated November 8, 2012, at 3.  In
her testimony at the hearing, she stated that the arrest was “the most difficult thing [she] ever had
to go through” and that very few people know about it.  Tr. at 30.  On cross-examination, she
acknowledged that she had been careful in preparing her answers to the SCAs.  She went on to state
that she had been undergoing considerable stress, caused by her divorce, her brother’s death, and
damage to her property inflicted by renters.  She testified that her stress level when she prepared the
SCAs was high, as a consequence of which she “didn’t know what to do anymore.”  Tr. at 55-56.
2With one exception not pertinent to this case.
4
When Department Counsel asked her specifically if she was claiming that stress had rendered her
unable to provide truthful answers on numerous occasions, she reiterated the pressures she had
experienced and then testified that her attorney had told her she did not have to reveal the
information.  Tr. at 56.  Despite Applicant’s testimony about the expungement order, much of her
presentation at the hearing focused upon her embarrassment and stress.  A reasonable person in the
Judge’s position could conclude that avoiding embarrassment predominated over other of
Applicant’s stated concerns.
Moreover, we note evidence that (1) the SCA questions were clear and unambiguous in their
requirement to list even expunged offenses,2 (2) Applicant is highly educated and facile in her use
of English, and (3) her omissions occurred repeatedly over several years’ time.  The record as a
whole supports the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s omissions were motivated not by a reasonable
belief that she did not have to divulge the incident but rather by a desire to avoid mentioning an
event that caused her embarrassment and that she hoped to keep secret.  The record contains
substantial evidence of the deliberate nature of Applicant’s omissions.  
We have considered Applicant’s arguments regarding the sufficiency of the Judge’s
treatment of the mitigating conditions and whole-person factors.  Applicant has proposed an
alternative interpretation of the evidence, but that alone is not sufficient to demonstrate error.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-08295 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 6, 2012).  The Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.
“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See
also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
Signed: James E. Moody                     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
