Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-7, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-C. AE C was1
timely received post-hearing.
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1990), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No.11-09243
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 13 September 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E, Personal
Conduct, and H, Drug Involvement.  Applicant timely answered, requesting a hearing2
before the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case
to me 4 January 2013, and I convened a hearing 30 January 2013. DOHA received the
transcript (Tr.) 6 February 2013.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 33-year-old test and verification
specialist employed by a defense contractor since September 2008. He seeks to retain
the clearance issued to him in April 2006. He was previously granted a clearance in
May 2001. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from October 1999 to August
2006.
Applicant has an extensive history of minor encounters with law enforcement
officials, alcohol abuse, and drug abuse, resulting in a variety of dispositions and
charges. Most of the incidents involve drug or alcohol abuse. 
Between October 1999 and August 2006, while Applicant was serving on active
duty, he would occasionally go to work under the influence of alcohol. In October 2001,
while serving overseas Applicant was involved in an alcohol-related traffic accident
resulting in personal injury and damage to private and host-nation-government property.
Applicant had been drinking and was driving too fast for road conditions. His blood-
alcohol level was .07 percent (GE 7). He was given an oral reprimand, assessed six
points on his driving record, and had his license suspended.
In November 2003, he was awarded non-judicial punishment (NJP) for a physical
altercation with another soldier. He was reprimanded, reduced in rate one pay grade,
and given 30 days extra duty. This incident was not alcohol related. In May 2004, he
used cocaine once. In October 2004, he was again awarded NJP for being drunk in
public and being involved in a barracks fight. He was fined, reduced one pay grade, and
given 14 days extra duty (GE 6). He was evaluated by the military’s substance abuse
program in October 2004, but not found to have a substance abuse problem. 
In November 2004, he was arrested and charged with drunk in public in the local
jurisdiction, fined, and ordered to pay costs. In April 2008, he was charged with reckless
driving for driving 110 miles per hour in a 70 mile-per-hour zone. He was sentenced to
21 days in jail and had his license suspended for 90 days (GE 5). Applicant states that
this incident occurred after the unexpected death of a family member.
In July 2008, he was arrested for felony possession of a controlled substance. He
was ultimately convicted of misdemeanor possession of paraphernalia and fined (GE 3,
4). He had been given a prescription painkiller by a friend after a basketball game in
July 2007, when Applicant complained of muscle pain after the game. Applicant did not
take the painkiller at the time, but put it in his wallet, where it was later discovered
during a routine search upon reporting to serve his jail sentence for his April 2008
speeding offense.
Applicant’s military service included a year serving in a combat zone from 2003
to 2004. His unit sustained significant losses, including his commanding officer and
senior non-commissioned officer. Some of the deaths he witnessed close hand. After
Applicant returned from combat, he was ordered to counseling to address any potential
3
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Applicant went to several sessions, did not get
anything out of them, and quit going (Tr. 91-92). Nevertheless, he was rated as 10
percent disabled in January 2007 because of his PTSD, among other conditions (AE C).
Applicant has acknowledged that he used drugs and alcohol to self-medicate (Tr.
39-40, 93). However, he has not sought any counseling for his PTSD since leaving the
military, and there is nothing in his disability rating to formally connect his drug and
alcohol abuse to his PTSD. He also did not seek any counseling for his drug or alcohol
abuse.
 After Applicant got out of the military, he used marijuana on a regular basis from
June 2007 to May 2010, a period during which he held a security clearance. He used
mostly on weekends. He also bought marijuana for his personal use during this period.
He decided to stop using marijuana in May 2010, because, although he had been
married since June 2006, he and his wife had bought a house in February 2009, and
were expecting their first child in February 2011. He began to decrease his alcohol
consumption at the same time, although he acknowledges being intoxicated on New
Year’s Eve 2013, when he drank six beers (Tr. 70). He also did not want to lose his job
or jeopardize any future employment opportunities (GE 2). He has since learned that he
and his wife are expecting their second child (Answer).
Applicant’s employer rated him an outstanding employee on his 2012 appraisal
(Answer). Applicant’s past employment references (Answer), current employment
references (Answer, AE B), character references (Answer), and pastor (AE A) consider
Applicant honest and trustworthy, and recommend him for his clearance. However,
most of them display no knowledge of the issues raised in the SOR, and the few who
appear to be aware of any adverse information in Applicant’s past make only vague
references to mistakes, shortcomings, or indiscretions.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline
H (Drug Involvement).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
His July 2008 arrest for felony possession of a controlled substance, and his later misdemeanor conviction4
for possession of paraphernalia, I find mitigated both by the passage of time—nearly five years, the
circumstances both of obtaining the painkiller and the discovery of his possession, and the fact that he never
used the painkiller and forgot he had it for over a year.
¶ 16 (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse5
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information; (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. . . ;
4
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant abused alcohol occasionally
from October to at least August 2006. Since October 2001, when he was 22 years old,
Applicant has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to comply with the law. He had
alcohol-related incidents in October 2001, October 2004, and November 2004, used
cocaine in violation of military regulations in May 2004, and was disciplined for a
physical altercation in November 2003. The incidents after May 2004 occurred after he
returned from his combat tour, and experienced events that led to his PTSD diagnosis
in January 2007. After leaving the military in August 2006, marijuana became his drug
of choice, and he use it during periods he held a security clearance. In April 2008, he
was arrested and ultimately convicted for reckless driving (driving over 40 miles per
hour over the posted speed limit) after learning of the untimely death of a family
member.4
Distilled to its essence, Applicant’s misconduct demonstrates a consistent pattern
of poor judgment over many years.   By his own assessment, Applicant abused first5
alcohol, then marijuana, to help him deal with the effects of his PTSD. His resort to self-
medication, and his failure to seek counseling to determine whether his PTSD actually
relates to his substance abuse, raise the security concern that he might not be as
¶25.(a) any drug abuse. . .; (c) illegal drug possession, including. . . purchase. . . ; (g) any illegal drug use6
after being granted a security clearance; 
¶26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that7
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶26.(b). a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as; . . . (3) an appropriate period8
of abstinence;
5
immune to a recurrence of drug or alcohol abuse as he might be without PTSD as an
issue. Put another way, without an assessment of the role, if any, that PTSD played in
his alcohol and drug abuse since May 2004, I cannot conclude that the positive changes
in his life engendered by his changed family situation and evinced by his employment
record, and employment and character references, are sufficient to protect him from
returning to drug or alcohol abuse in the future. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
The Government also established a case for disqualification under Guideline H.6
However, Applicant mitigated the security concerns. His one-time use of cocaine in May
2004 is both distant in time and infrequent.  His regular use of marijuana ended in May7
2010. His abstinence from drug use—now nearly three years—is adequate to
demonstrate an intent to refrain from drug use in the future.  I conclude Applicant is8
unlikely to use illegal drugs in the future. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline H for
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph j: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-d: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                 
                           
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
