 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-04155 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 10, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 23, 
2013, that was amended on May 29, 2013, due to scheduling conflicts. The hearing was 
 
2 
 
 
timely convened on June 12, 2013. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR allegation 1.e to reflect the amount 
of $1,623, not $137. Noting no objection, the SOR was so amended to comport with the 
evidence. Applicant testified and was examined by both the Department Counsel and 
myself. The record was closed upon receipt of the hearing transcript (Tr.), which was 
received on June 20, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted a majority of the 28 SOR allegations, and either denied or did 
not respond to the rest. In sum, Applicant admits to approximately $8,000 of the 
$23,000 in delinquent debt alleged. (Tr. 11) After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She is a custodial facilities helper who has worked at 
the same job for different contractors for the past 12 years. She currently earns almost 
$35,000 a year. Applicant attended high school. She is divorced and has raised two 
adult children. Applicant received financial counseling, which she found beneficial. It 
helped her to learn how to prioritize and satisfy debts, and how to minimize spending to 
the essentials. Overall, it has helped her learn to live within her means. (Tr. 29). 
 
 In the mid-1990s, Applicant’s marriage began to sour. While Applicant worked, 
her husband had significant problems with drugs, gambling, and over-spending. In turn, 
Applicant over-relied on credit, increasing their credit card debt. She divorced her 
husband in the late 1990s, but he continued to abuse her kindness and desire to help 
him. During this time, he overused her credit cards and stole money from her bank 
account. His adverse impact on Applicant’s finances had already led to a 2002 Chapter 
7 bankruptcy petition and discharge. She was able to prevent her automobile from being 
repossessed. She ultimately ceased contact with her ex-husband.  
 
In mid-2007, Applicant realized the full extent her ex-husband had on her 
financial situation. She consulted an attorney to help her seek bankruptcy protection. A 
petition was prepared to cover what Applicant believed to be all of her debts. (Tr. 23) In 
September 2007, she filed that petition under Chapter 13 and made the necessary 
arrangements to have her monthly payments on the bankruptcy plan ($134.75) 
automatically deducted from her paycheck. Most Chapter 13 plans are completed in 
three to five years depending on income and the structure of the plan. 
 
 After approximately four years of payments, Applicant had made significant 
progress under her Chapter 13 repayment plan. Then her company lost its contract with 
the government at some point in 2011. She was hired by the successor company to 
continue in her position after a brief period of unemployment, but the former and 
successor companies did not accurately transfer her payroll information. As a result, the 
new company never debited from her income the payments to be wired to the 
 
3 
 
 
bankruptcy court. This problem was not immediately apparent. Meanwhile, she worked 
hard to economize. At some point in 2012, Applicant realized the bankruptcy deductions 
were not being made. After much research, she discovered that the Chapter 13 petition 
had been dismissed in October 2011. She knew that substantial progress should have 
been made on the debt covered by the Chapter 13 filing over the four years her 
payments were timely made. (Tr. 23) By mid-2012, she initiated actions to try to have 
the bankruptcy case and repayment plan reopened, noting that the interruption in 
payments had been the result of a third-party administrative mishap, not her inability to 
make payments on the plan. Eventually, her requests were rebuffed.  
 
At least $5,182.50 was paid by Applicant on the bankruptcy plan. With no 
additional information or explanation from the Chapter 13 bankruptcy trustee, she has 
since been trying to decipher which debts were satisfied and what her present 
obligations are on any other accounts. 
 
Since filing for bankruptcy in 2007, Applicant has acquired no new delinquent 
debts. She had adhered to what she learned in financial counseling. Her rent has been 
timely paid for at least the last seven years. She has always made at least the minimum 
monthly payments on her accounts. Within the past year, she was expecting a 
significant pay raise, but that raise was not executed due to the change in contractors. 
She has kept in control of the few minor balances acquired due to emergencies.  
 
Despite her resolve to address the debts noted in her bankruptcy, Applicant has 
suffered recent setbacks. She has had difficulty adapting to expenses over which she 
has little or no control, such as the rising costs associated with her rent, health 
insurance, and car insurance. These increases coincided with a temporary layoff she 
experienced before a new company took over the contract covering her position and 
brought her back to work. (Tr. 31) While she was brought back to work, it was without 
her expected raise. Indeed, she was rehired at a lower wage than she was previously 
earning. (Tr. 32). She now takes home about $125 less a month than she did 
previously. This sum represents a significant reduction for Applicant, who lives alone in 
a studio apartment and cautiously watches her expenditures. Her job and her recent 
employment change have also adversely impacted her health. Her custodial duties 
include heavy lifting, trash recycling, and other janitorial services demanding she 
maneuver up to 125 pounds at a time. Consequently, she has developed significant 
back issues. Her work with chemicals has impacted her sinuses and lungs. She has 
also has multiple unrelated surgeries in the past couple of years. She has never been 
eligible for workers compensation. She recently had an emergency procedure that kept 
her in hospital for a week and generated about $1,000 in debt. 
 
During the hearing, the Government and Applicant discussed the debts at issue, 
including those included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. The debts on which 
progress has been made are as follows: 
 
1.b ($631) – A duplicate of 1.l for a utility service. On motion by the Government, 
this allegation was struck from the SOR as duplicative and the SOR so amended. 
 
4 
 
 
 
1.f ($463) – Applicant has been in continuing contact with this 
telecommunications carrier disputing the balance reflected. (Tr. 39). 
 
1.g ($7,722) – This debt, which is the largest and most significant debt at issue, 
was included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment plan and was shown to have 
been satisfied. (Tr. 26-27). 
   
1.j ($507) and 1.y ($185) – Applicant has regularly paid on a debt repayment plan 
with her state regarding these balances. (Tr. 40-41, 44). 
 
1.l ($521) – This was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment 
plan. (Tr. 38). 
 
1.m ($77) – This medical debt was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
repayment plan. (Tr. 42). 
 
1.n ($93) -- This debt was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
repayment plan. (Tr. 42). 
 
1.p ($4,635) – This debt, the second largest debt at issue, was included in the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment plan.  
 
1.q ($568) -- This debt was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
repayment plan. (Tr. 42). 
 
1.r (239) -- This debt was included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. (Tr. 42-43). 
Applicant characterized the creditor as a “scam” and has disputed this debt. 
 
1.t ($45) – Although Applicant cannot identify this account, it was included in 
Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment plan. (Tr. 43) 
 
1.x ($101) – This was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment 
plan. (Tr. 44). 
 
1.y ($185) -- This was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment 
plan. (Tr. 44). 
 
Going forward, Applicant’s strategy for addressing her debts is to recognize and 
accept that she cannot pay all of them off at the same time. Therefore, she is 
approaching them by working on the smallest debts first, then working her way up to the 
larger ones when she is able. (Tr. 47) She is presently sorting out the balances owed on 
the debts included in the Chapter 13 repayment plan. The remaining 11 debts, which 
amount to about $6,000, range in amount from under $100 to $1,290. She hopes to 
continue paying off her smaller debts until she can start a repayment plan to finish off 
the debts formerly included in the bankruptcy repayment plan. After financial 
 
5 
 
 
counseling, she spends cautiously and prioritizes expenses. She has taken steps to 
remove all impediments vexing her attempts at financial stability, such as her ex-
husband. It is her intent to satisfy her debt as expeditiously as she can, although she 
recognizes that her recent 25% reduction in salary has adversely impacted her ability to 
make significant progress in the near future. (Tr. 50)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she has been willing, but unable to 
pay. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established because Applicant’s initial financial issues were related 
to abuses by her ex-husband who acquired debts in Applicant’s name. Later, her 
bankruptcy plan was halted and dismissed due to an administrative error over which 
Applicant had no control. Moreover, Applicant has recently endured serious medical 
issues which necessitated surgery and time off from work, and imposed physical 
limitations on her ability to work. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must 
have acted responsibly under the circumstances. When she became overwhelmed with 
debt that was beyond the scope of her income due to her ex-husband’s machinations, 
she sought bankruptcy protection. In doing so, she chose Chapter 13, rather than 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, thus financially contributing toward the debts to be dismissed. 
When that bankruptcy was dismissed through no fault of her own, she actively sought to 
have the case reopened so she could have her payments resumed. Since that time, she 
has faced a drastic reduction in salary after a brief layoff. However, she has adapted to 
her new situation without acquiring an unwieldy amount of new debt. It appears that the 
sum remaining to be addressed can realistically be resolved in a slow, but measured 
way as her salary base returns to its previous level. I find AG ¶ 20(b) fully applies.  
 
 Applicant began addressing her debts long before the issuance of the SOR. She 
put most of her debts into her Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. She made substantial 
progress in her payments on that plan until a third-party’s administrative mistake led to 
the dismissal of her petition. Since that time, she received financial counseling. 
Applicant testified that she found such counseling genuinely helpful in prioritizing her 
needs and her bills. She demonstrated that she can apply this approach in adapting to 
her recent reduction in pay. Meanwhile, she is using prioritization of debts (from lowest 
to highest) as a model for approaching her remaining debt. I find that AG ¶ 20(c) and 
AG ¶ 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old custodial facilities helper currently earning 
approximately $35,000 a year after a significant reduction in salary and a brief layoff 
between contracts. She attended high school and raised two children. Both during and 
after her marriage, her ex-husband abused Applicant’s trust and finances. At age 45, 
she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, with payments automatically drawn down through 
her employer’s payroll. .A change in contractors led to an inadvertent cessation of 
payments on the bankruptcy plan, and the plan was ultimately dismissed without her 
knowledge. When Applicant learned of the error, she tried to have the plan reinstituted, 
knowing that after four years of timely payments that the plan should be nearing 
completion. Her request was denied. Since that time, she has been discerning which 
accounts were included in the bankruptcy petition and which still remain in need of 
direct action.  
 
At issue in the SOR was approximately $23,000 in delinquent debt. In her 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to approximately $8,000 in delinquent debt. 
The Government and Applicant reviewed the debts at issue. Applicant has made 
significant and reasonable efforts given her circumstances to address the majority of her 
debt. But for a third-party error, Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment plan 
should have been completed by now. Regardless, she has actively monitored and 
managed her debts in good faith -- despite by a recent cut in salary and significant rise 
in rent and health insurance.  
 
An applicant is not required to be debt-free, nor required to develop a plan for 
paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an 
applicant act responsibly given the circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions that evidence a 
serious intent to effectuate the plan. The fact that an applicant’s debts will not be paid 
off for a long time, in and of itself, may be of limited security concern. See, e.g., ISCR 
 
9 
 
 
Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009); ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 31, 2011). It is also significant that Applicant is no longer involved in activities 
or with individuals that foster the acquisition of delinquent debt. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 10-04405 at 4 (Sep. 19, 2011). Indeed, despite a recent reduction in salary, 
Applicant, through financial counseling, has learned to take control of her life and her 
finances, prioritize her needs, and organize her bills. In terms of managing her finances, 
Applicant now exercises self-control, notable caution, and good judgment. 
 
Here, Applicant demonstrated that she successfully filed a Chapter 13, as 
opposed to a Chapter 7, bankruptcy action. This required the development of a 
reasonable repayment plan, rather than an application to have all debts simply 
discharged with no effort by the Applicant under Chapter 7. Applicant regularly made 
payments on that plan through payroll deduction, establishing a track record of reliable 
payments, until a 2011 change in contractors led to the cessation of her automatic 
payments to the bankruptcy court. When Applicant discovered the problem in 2012, she 
earnestly sought to have the plan reinstated, noting that four years of regular payments 
represented payment of a majority of the payments due on the plan, and pointing out 
that the gaffe ceasing the payments was the result of clerical error, not from a failure on 
her part. Since then, she has applied what she learned through financial counseling to 
prioritize her debts, devised a strategy (paying off the lowest amounts first), and 
simplified her lifestyle. Just as she was recently poised to make some notable strides 
because of an anticipated raise, her employer changed, she was temporarily laid off, 
and then rehired at a significantly lower salary; meanwhile, her rent, health insurance, 
and auto insurance increased.   
 
Despite multiple setbacks, Applicant has demonstrated a track record for 
addressing her debts as best she can, given her means and circumstances. She 
remains committed to honoring her debts and has been diligent in trying to make sure 
her efforts toward that end are executed.  In light of her present situation, there is little 
more she can do but attempt slow and measured steps toward satisfying the smaller 
debts, while she works her way back up the salary ladder. In short, despite her modest 
income and protracted plan for satisfying her remaining debt, which is not an unwieldy 
sum, Applicant’s continued diligence, demonstrated good faith, and reasonable plan for 
addressing her debts reflect her commitment to satisfying her remaining debt. Overall, 
despite Applicant’s recent reduction in pay, I am impressed by her ability to adjust to 
that reduction with such equanimity and sustained resolve. Her commitment to 
addressing her debts as she is able is highly credible. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance given the unique facts presented in this case. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
10 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.bb:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
