 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08995 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 18, 2012, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on April 23, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 10, 2013, setting the hearing for 
May 30, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
into evidence without objections. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through 
 
2 
 
J, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 4, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and has worked as an inspector for a government 
contractor since January 2011. He is a high school graduate with some college 
eductation. He is married and has two adult children. He retired from the Navy in 1995 
after 20 years of honorable service in the pay grade of E-6. He does not currently hold a 
security clearance, but has held a secret clearance in the past.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was indebted on seven accounts, including a debt to 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The debts were listed on a credit reports dated May 
2013, October 2012, July 2012, and February 2011. Applicant admitted all the debts, 
but indicated that he had paid or was making payments on each of them.2  
 
 After Applicant retired from the Navy in 1995, he was hired by a commercial 
company and worked for them for seven years, until he was laid-off in 2003. Starting in 
2003, he began working a series of temporary jobs with multiple contractors. He 
typically worked about six months at a time and then would be laid-off for four months. 
This is when his debts became unmanageable. Once he was hired in his present full-
time position, he was able to make strides toward paying his past due debts. The debt 
to the IRS is for two tax years. He owed taxes for taking a loan from his retirement 
account that was not repaid and because he over claimed mileage expenses in another 
tax year. He has established a payment plan with the IRS to pay these debts.3   
 
 Applicant presented documentation showing the debt listed in SOR ¶1.a was 
paid in full in July 2012. He presented documentation that the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.b 
was settled in May 2013. He introduced documentation showing that the debts listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d arose from the same transaction and are duplicate debts. The 
documentation also shows that the underlying debt was paid in full in May 2013. He 
provided documentation showing that the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f arose from 
the same transaction and are duplicate debts. He also showed proof that he established 
a payment plan for the underlying debt and has been making payments for 18 months. 
He currently pays $300 monthly toward this debt. He presented documentation showing 
his payment plan with the IRS has him making monthly payments of $100, which he 
recently increased to $200. Although not listed in the SOR, Applicant also provided 
documentation that he is current on his student loan payments. He is current on all his 
other debt and he has sufficient monthly disposable income to pay all his obligations 
($3000).4  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-7, 55-56; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 38, 41-42; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 39-40, 42, 44-45, 47-49, 52; GE 3; Answer; AE A-J. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent. He has either paid all 
debts or is making substantial payments toward the debts. Since he has made a 
 
5 
 
concerted effort to repair his financial position, it is reasonable to conclude that these 
types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant became indebted when he was underemployed for about seven years. 
Once he obtained full-time employment in 2011, he began paying off his delinquent 
debt. His underemployment was a condition beyond his control and once he was able to 
do so, he acted responsibly by paying most of his debts and establishing payment plans 
for the remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There are clear indications that all the debts have been resolved through 
payment or are being resolved through payment plans. He made good-faith efforts to 
resolve all the debts listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence showing the 
payments made and the payment plans established. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his 
debts. He either paid the debts or established payment plans on the remaining debts. I 
found nothing to indicate a likelihood that Applicant would find himself in a similar future 
situation.  
 
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
