 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08529 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement; Guideline J, criminal conduct; Guideline E, personal conduct; and 
Guideline G, alcohol consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 23, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement; Guideline J, criminal conduct; and Guideline E, personal conduct. DoD 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 17, 2012, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on March 20, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 28, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on April 25, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was kept open for Applicant to submit additional evidence. He submitted AE G 
through M in a timely fashion and they were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 3, 2013. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Upon motion by Department Counsel, I amended the SOR by adding four 
allegations under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, as follows: 
 
4.a. As set forth in subparagraph 2.b. 
 
4.b. As set forth in subparagraph 2.c. 
 
4.c. You were diagnosed with alcohol abuse in early remission in 
approximately June 2012, and as a problem stage I/II drinker in 
approximately September 2012. 
 
4.d. You failed to follow a court order prohibiting you from consuming 
alcohol during your probationary period. 
 
Applicant did not object to the amendment. He was afforded an opportunity to submit 
additional evidence regarding these amended allegations, which he did by submitting a 
post-hearing document admitting all the allegations.1  
 
 On my own motion, I amended SOR allegation ¶ 1.c to change the dates stated 
therein as follows: “From April 2007 to August 2007.” This amendment conforms the 
factual allegation to the evidence set forth in the record.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the allegations in the SOR, except for SOR 
¶ 3.a. He also admitted all the amended allegations.3 After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
                                                          
1 Tr. 65-67, 97-99; AE K. 
 
2 Tr. 97-99. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old. He is single and has no children. Since January 2011, 
he has worked for a defense contractor as a quality engineer. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. He has no military background and has never held a security clearance.4   
 
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR and the amended SOR includes: 
(1) using marijuana on multiple occasions from about June 2006 to October 2009; using 
Adderall, without a prescription, on one occasion in July 2010; purchasing and reselling 
LSD and marijuana from about April 2007 to August 2007 (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c); (2) 
being charged with underage drinking in April 2007; being arrested for driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI), eluding officers, and other related charges in February 2011 
(See SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c); (3) being diagnosed as an alcohol abuser in June 2012; and 
failing to follow a court order prohibiting him from drinking alcohol while on probation. 
(See SOR ¶¶ 4.c and 4.d). The conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was also alleged as 
criminal conduct under Guideline J. (See SOR ¶ 2.a ) The conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
2.b and 2.c was also alleged as alcohol consumption under Guideline G. (See SOR ¶¶ 
4.a and 4.b)  
  
 Applicant began using drugs after he graduated from high school in 2006. He 
claims to have used a pipe to smoke marijuana by taking it into his mouth, but because 
he started coughing, he did not inhale the smoke. He did not use marijuana again until 
the summer of 2008. He smoked marijuana with his friends two to three times a week 
during the summer. They smoked it by using a pipe. After he returned to college in the 
fall, he reduced his marijuana use to once a week with his friends and roommate. He 
stopped using marijuana in October 2009 because he was beginning to apply for jobs 
and wanted to be drug free. He has not used marijuana since then. In 2010, he used the 
drug Adderall without a prescription. He used the drug with friends after work one night 
when they wanted to stay up late. He took one pill and felt its effect by not being able to 
sleep.5 
 
 In about April 2007, Applicant began selling marijuana and LSD as a profit-
making enterprise. He engaged in this activity for about five months until about August 
2007. He bought the drugs from one person and sold to two of his friends. He sold 
about ten doses of LSD every three weeks and sold about three to four pounds of 
marijuana over the entire period. He made a profit of $200 to $300 per week. He sold 
these drugs because he needed the money and thought it would be a good way to 
make extra money. He stopped selling drugs when he went back to college in August 
2007. He claims to have not sold drugs since then. He remains in contact with the two 
friends to whom he sold drugs.6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
3 AE K. 
 
4 Tr. 73-74; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 39-40, 43-44; GE 2 (p. I-15). 
 
6 Tr. 30-31, 49-50; GE (p. I-16). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In April 2007, Applicant was arrested for underage drinking on the campus of the 
college he was attending. He and some friends were drinking alcohol and he was 18 
years old at the time. He was given a citation by a campus police officer. He pleaded 
guilty, was fined, and ordered to attend a drug and alcohol education class.7  
 
 In February 2011, Applicant was arrested for DUI, attempting to elude police 
officers, and other related charges. He was drinking alcohol at a local bar and then 
decided to drive home. He had about four beers and one shot of whiskey before he left 
the bar. He was stopped by local law enforcement after his car slid around a corner. He 
stopped as soon as he saw the flashing lights. In April 2012, he pleaded guilty to the 
DUI and eluding charges and was sentenced to 12 months’ probation, a fine, and court-
ordered evaluation and treatment for alcohol and/or drug dependency. One of the terms 
of his probation was no consumption of alcohol during the term of probation. His 
probation ended in April 2013.8 
 
 Applicant received about ten hours of court-ordered drug and alcohol counseling 
in June and September 2012. In June 2012, he was diagnosed by a licensed clinical 
social worker at an approved alcohol treatment center as an alcohol abuser in 
remission. In September 2012, he was further evaluated as a “Problem Stage I/II 
drinker.” No treatment plan was recommended. After his arrest in February 2011, but 
before his court appearance in April 2012, Applicant admitted to driving under the 
influence of alcohol on another occasion. He does not remember how much he drank 
then, but it was “a lot.” He also began violating his probation by drinking alcohol in April 
2012, soon after his sentencing. He stopped drinking until September 2012 when he 
began drinking on a regular basis. After September 2012, he was drinking about twice a 
week and would consume three to four drinks each time. He did not inform his probation 
officer that he was drinking during his probation period. He knew he was violating his 
probation by consuming alcohol in this manner before his probation ended in April 2013. 
He does not believe he has a problem with alcohol use.9 
 
 Applicant filled out his security clearance application in March 2011. In the 
application he was asked about whether he illegally used any drugs, including 
prescription drugs, in the last seven years. He answered yes to the question and listed 
his marijuana use from June 2008 to October 2009. He did not list his marijuana use in 
2006. He did not consider this a “use” of marijuana, since he coughed out the smoke 
before he could inhale it. Applicant did not inform the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator about the “attempted” use in 2006 during his security clearance 
interview in March 2011. However, he did consider this incident a “use” of marijuana 
when he completed interrogatories sent out by DOHA because he answered the 
question of when he first used marijuana by stating that he first used marijuana in June 
                                                          
7 Tr. 30, 79; GE 2 (p. I-14). 
 
8 Tr. 32, 51, 53-54; GE 2 (pp. I-13, I-34). 
 
9 Tr. 32, 53-54, 56, 58, 60-62, 64, 82, 85; GE 2 (p. I-33); AE A, K. 
 
 
5 
 
 
2006. He also did not list his July 2010 use of Adderall on his security clearance 
application. He claims to have forgotten about this one-time use when he was filling out 
the application.10 
  
 Applicant offered two years of job evaluation reports that characterized him as an 
“exceptional contributor” to his organization for 2011, and gave him an overall rating of 
4.2 (out of 5) for 2012. He is described by his supervisor as exhibiting maturity beyond 
his current salary grade. He also offered several character letters from coworkers and 
friends. He is described as having a high work ethic, and as being trustworthy, honest, 
loyal, respectful, and goal oriented.11 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
10 Tr. 37, 39-42; GE 2 (p. I-8). 
 
11 AE C-G. 
 
 
6 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Between 2006 and 2010, Appellant illegally used marijuana on a number of 
occasions and used Adderall on one occasion. For a five-month period during 2007, he 
sold both marijuana and LSD for profit. I find that all the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana during 2008 and 2009 was frequent. His period of 
abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
Although three years have passed since his last drug use of Adderall in 2010, his 
overall behavior of drug use and distribution for profit cause me concern. He did not 
establish that recurrence is unlikely.  Even though he apparently has abstained from 
drug use and distribution for several years, his past actions, particularly his conscious 
decision to sell drugs for profit, cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. It is too soon to tell whether his use will recur. Although he claims he no 
longer uses drugs, this is not enough to show a demonstrated intent not to use drugs in 
the future. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) partially apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s numerous drug sales, his underage drinking charge, and his DUI and 
eluding police charges constitute criminal action on his part. I find that both disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 
8 
 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s DUI conviction was in April 2012 and his probation ended for that 
charge in April 2013. He has shown a steady pattern of criminal activity since 2007. 
There has not been a sufficient amount of time to determine whether his rehabilitative 
efforts will be successful. Given his past history of criminal activity, it cannot be 
determined that it is unlikely that future criminal behavior will recur. His past criminal 
behavior casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Under these 
circumstances, his last criminal act is not sufficiently attenuated after considering his 
behavior in its totality. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. Applicant admitted that he violated 
the terms of his probation not to drink alcohol on a weekly basis for several months. His 
actions show a lack of rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(d) does not apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
Applicant failed to list his illegal use of marijuana in 2006 because he did not 
consider what he did to be a “use” of marijuana. He claims to have forgotten about 
using Adderall in 2010. I did not find his testimony credible on either of these points. He 
deliberately failed to list these uses on his security clearance application in 2011. AG ¶ 
16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 
9 
 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s 
falsifications. Falsifying information on a security clearance application is not a minor 
offense and doing so casts doubt on his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 (e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
 (g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 Applicant’s underage drinking charge, his DUI conviction, his diagnosis as an 
alcohol abuser, in remission, and his violation of the court’s order prohibiting his use of 
alcohol during his probationary period support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
10 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, 
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible 
use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant’s underage drinking is remote in time, but is brought back to relevancy 
by his most recent DUI offense in 2011. His unwillingness to obey the court’s order not 
to drink during his probation casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Applicant did not meet his burden to show that similar behavior is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. He does not acknowledge having an 
alcohol problem. He was aware of the court order prohibiting him from drinking alcohol 
during his probation, yet he chose to do so anyway. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. He did 
attend an alcohol education program in September 2012, which recommended no 
further treatment. The treatment program was apparently unaware of his probation 
violations. Applicant continues to consume alcohol on a regular basis, despite his 
diagnosis as an alcohol abuser. There was no evidence presented that he participates 
in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), or any similar group. AG ¶ 23(d) partially applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
11 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s job 
evaluations and his coworker support. However, I also considered that he sold drugs for 
profit and violated a judge’s order not to consume alcohol on multiple occasions. 
Despite the presence of some mitigation, Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 4.a-4.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
