1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-09987
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 12, 2013
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on February 23, 2011. (Item 5.)  On November 16, 2012, the Department of
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct) concerning
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 10, 2013, and requested a
decision by an administrative judge without a hearing. (Item 4.) Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s written case (FORM) to Applicant on March 19, 2013. The
FORM contained nine documents. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on
April 1, 2013. He was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit any additional
documentation. Applicant submitted an additional personal statement on April 17, 2013.
Department Counsel indicated she had no objection to this document, and it is admitted
2
into evidence as Applicant Exhibit A. Based upon a review of the pleadings, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 32 and married. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant
admitted allegations 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.k, 1.l, 1.o, 1.q, and 1.r in the SOR under this
Paragraph. Those admissions are findings of fact. Applicant denied the other
allegations. He also submitted additional information to support his request for a
security clearance.
The SOR lists 20 delinquent debts, totaling approximately $84,217. The
existence and amount of these debts is supported by credit reports dated March 2,
2011; August 7, 2012; and March 18, 2013. (Items 9, 8, and 7.) (See also undated
Interrogatories submitted by Applicant. (Item 6.)) The current status of the debts is as
follows:
1.a. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a judgment in the
amount of $29,280. He has attempted to resolve this judgment without success.
(Applicant Exhibit A at 1.) No payments have been made on this judgment. This debt is
not resolved.
1.b. Applicant denies that he is indebted to his state Employment Development
Department for a judgment regarding an overpayment in the amount of $770. He states
that this amount was taken out of his income tax refunds. (Applicant Exhibit A at 1.) The
most recent credit report in the file, Item 7, dated March 18, 2013, continues to show
this debt as being unpaid. This debt is not resolved.
1.c. Applicant denies in his Answer that he is indebted to a power company in
the amount of $172. In Applicant Exhibit A at 2 he states that his mother and brother
fraudulently opened this account in Applicant’s name. He also states that he is
accepting responsibility for this debt and that it is unpaid. In addition, there is no
information that he has disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies, or taken
any other actions with regards to his mother’s alleged misconduct. This debt is not
resolved.
1.d. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a mobile phone debt
in the amount of $1,129. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) He has not made any recent
3
payments on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not
resolved.
1.e. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a returned check in
the amount of $319. He states in Applicant Exhibit A at 2 that this incident occurred
because his mother wiped out his bank account. He has not made any recent payments
on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not resolved.
1.f. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a mobile phone bill in
the amount of $3,031. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) He has not made any recent payments
on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not resolved.
1.g. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due credit card
debt in the amount of $589. He states that it is his belief his mother fraudulently opened
this account in his name. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) However, there is no information
that he has disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies, or taken any other
actions with regards to his mother’s alleged misconduct. He has not made any recent
payments on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not
resolved.
1.h. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due credit card
debt in the amount of $397. He states that it is his belief his mother fraudulently opened
this account in his name. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) However, there is no information
that he has disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies, or taken any other
actions with regards to his mother’s alleged misconduct. He has not made any recent
payments on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not
resolved.
1.i. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due credit card
debt in the amount of $398. He states that it is his belief his mother fraudulently opened
this account in his name. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) However, there is no information
that he has disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies, or taken any other
actions with regards to his mother’s alleged misconduct. He has not made any recent
payments on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not
resolved.
1.j. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $11,795 for an automobile loan. He indicates that he has been making
payments on the debt. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) The most recent credit report in the file
shows that the debt only amounts to $6,323. Applicant did not provide any evidence
supporting his payments, such as a cancelled check or statement from this creditor.
This debt is not resolved.
1.k. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $14,646 for an automobile loan he cosigned with his mother. According to
Applicant she did not make the payments and he is now responsible. (Applicant Exhibit
4
A at 2-3.) He has not made any recent payments on this debt and has no current plans
to pay this debt. This debt is not resolved.
1.l. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $4,136. He indicates that he has made a payment arrangement on the debt.
(Applicant Exhibit A at 3.) Applicant did not provide any evidence supporting any
payments, such as a cancelled check or statement from this creditor. This debt is not
resolved.
1.m. Applicant denies in his Answer that he is indebted to a creditor in the
amount of $249 for cable services. In Applicant Exhibit A at page 3 he states that his
brother fraudulently opened this account in Applicant’s name. He also states that he is
accepting responsibility for this debt and that it is unpaid. In addition, there is no
information that he has disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies, or taken
any other actions with regards to his brother’s alleged misconduct. This debt is not
resolved.
1.n. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $11,713 for an automobile repossession. He states that he has no knowledge
of this debt, but is accepting responsibility for this debt. (Applicant Exhibit A at 3.) In his
Answer he states that this debt was in connection with an automobile loan on which he
was a cosigner. (Item 4 at 7.) No evidence was submitted showing that payments are
being made, or that the debt is being disputed to the credit reporting agencies. This debt
is not resolved.
1.o. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $4,320 for an automobile loan. According to Applicant, this debt should have
been resolved from an insurance payout after an accident involving the vehicle.
(Applicant Exhibit A at 3.) None of the credit bureau reports in the record support the
current existence of this debt. While Applicant’s admission would normally be sufficient
to prove this debt, under the particular circumstances of this case I find that the
existence of the debt is not supported by sufficient evidence. This debt is unproven and
this subparagraph is found for Applicant.
1.p. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $76. He states in his Answer that it is his belief an unstated person
fraudulently opened this account in his name. (Item 4 at 7.) However, there is no
information that he has disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies, or taken
any other actions with regards to this person’s alleged misconduct. He has not made
any recent payments on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is
not resolved.
1.q. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $108. He has not made any recent payments on this debt and has no current
plans to pay this debt. (Item 4 at 7.) This debt is not resolved.
5
1.r. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $137. He has not made any recent payments on this debt and has no current
plans to pay this debt. (Item 4 at 7.) This debt is not resolved.
1.s. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $30. He states that it is his belief an unstated person fraudulently opened this
account in his name. (Item 4 at 7-8.) However, there is no information that he has
disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies, or taken any other actions with
regards to this person’s alleged misconduct. He has not made any recent payments on
this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not resolved.
1.t. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the
amount of $922. He states that this debt was in regards to one of the vehicles he
cosigned for. (Item 4 at 8.) He has not made any recent payments on this debt and has
no current plans to pay this debt. This debt is not resolved.
Applicant submitted no evidence that he has received any financial counseling.
He states that some periods of unemployment, which encompass ten months from
September 2006 to date, had an impact on his finances, along with his wife’s illness and
his mother’s fraud. The evidence also shows that he has been gainfully employed since
2009, making approximately $200,000 a year with a monthly remainder of
approximately $1,800. (Item 5 at 13; Item 6 at 23.) He submitted evidence that he had
paid off one debt, which was not alleged in the SOR. (Item 6 at 26.)
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has made false statements to the Department of Defense during
the clearance screening process.
Applicant filled out a Government questionnaire in February 2011 in which he
stated that he had not had any property repossessed, had not had a judgment entered
against him, had not had bills turned over to a collection agency, and that he had not
had a credit card charged off for failing to pay as agreed.  (Item 6 at questions 26(b),
26(e), 26(g), and 26(h).)  These answers were not true, as set forth in detail under
Paragraph 1, above.
Applicant states that he did not intend to mislead the Government in regards to
his answers on the questionnaire. He states in his Answer and in Applicant Exhibit A
that he was simply unaware of his financial situation, including the judgments,
automobile repossessions and bad debts. He states that an unnamed “trustworthy”
person was handling his affairs. From other evidence in the record, this person would
appear to be his mother, who he accuses of opening several fraudulent accounts in his
name. However, even giving Applicant the benefit of the doubt with regards to those
particular debts, his financial situation was precarious and he knew, or should have
known, the extent of his problems. Applicant has simply not presented enough evidence
6
to show that the alleged falsifications were the result of innocent error. Therefore, under
the circumstances, I find that they were intentional.
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted
no character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment,
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common
sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in
making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
7
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. The Applicant has over $80,000 in past-due debts, all of which had
been due and owing for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial difficulties have been in existence since at least 2006. With the exception of
allegation 1.o. he has not resolved any of the debts that caused the problems, which
continue to date. This mitigating condition does not have application in this case. 
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
8
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”  Applicant stated, but did not support, allegations that some
of the debts were the result of his wife’s illness, periods of unemployment, and
particularly his mother’s malfeasance. No evidence was introduced showing that he had
acted responsibly with regards to any of these debts.
AG ¶ 20(d) states it can be mitigating where, “the individual has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant has not
submitted any evidence to show that he has made successful payment arrangements
with, or made payments to, any of the creditors listed in the SOR. He was interviewed
by an investigator connected with the Defense Department in June 2011. (Item 6 at 7-
18.) Accordingly, he has had knowledge for almost two years that his financial situation
was of concern to the Government.
Applicant stated that his mother and brother fraudulently opened accounts in his
name and ran up debts. However, he submitted no evidence that he had taken any
action to contest the debts, or otherwise correct their misconduct. Accordingly, AG ¶
20(e) does not apply to those debts. It requires that “the individual [have] a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”
In conclusion, as stated above, looking at Applicant’s entire financial situation at
the present time, I cannot find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control,” as is required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found against
Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
9
Applicant knowingly and purposely falsified his security clearance application on
February 23, 2011. He alleges that his failure to list his financial difficulties was due to
oversight, and not an intentional act. However, the fact remains that for years he has
had financial difficulties, which he attempts to blame, at least in part, on his mother. It
simply strains credulity for Applicant to have virtually no knowledge of his very bad
financial situation.
I have reviewed the mitigating conditions and find none of them apply to the facts
of this case. In particular, I have examined the span of time, just about two years, since
the falsification. There is insufficient evidence that Applicant currently shows good
judgment or is reliable. Paragraph 2 is found against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guidelines F and E, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems
for several years, which have not been resolved. He made some very poor financial
choices, and has a long history of not paying his debts. Applicant’s conduct with regards
to his finances was not mitigated. In addition, Applicant failed to show that the omission
of relevant and material information from his e-QIP was accidental and not intentional.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent and continuing. I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also
cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); or that there is no likelihood of continuation or recurrence (AG ¶
2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
10
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation, and falsifications to the Government. Accordingly, the evidence supports
denying his request for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.: Against Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
