 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07625 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant deliberately falsified his 2010 security clearance application (SCA) and 
made false statements to investigators in 2010 and 2011 to minimize and conceal his 
1990 and 2004 felony embezzlement charges that were later amended to misdemeanor 
offenses. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his SCA on December 1, 2010. On December 14, 2012, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing 
security concerns under Guideline J (criminal conduct) and Guideline E (personal 
conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 7, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued the first notice of hearing on April 17, 2013, scheduling a 
hearing for May 1, 2013. Applicant requested a delay, and a second notice of hearing 
was issued on April 24, 2013, scheduling a hearing for May 13, 2013. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 16. GE 15 was 
offered for me to take administrative notice of certain statutes. GE 16 was offered as a 
demonstrative evidence exhibit. As such, both were marked and considered by me, but 
not admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 8. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 21, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
On May 7, 2013 (seven days prior to the hearing), Department Counsel moved to 
amend the SOR. The undated motion was marked Appellate Exhibit (App.E) 1, and 
made part of the record. Applicant received it either May 8 or May 9, 2013. Applicant did 
not object to the motion. He stated he had sufficient time to prepare for his hearing and 
was ready to proceed. He affirmatively waived his right to 15 days advance notice of the 
allegations against him. I granted the written motion as requested. (Tr. 13-22) 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to further amend SOR ¶ 1.d by 
adding the date “February 22, 2011” after the date December 29, 2010. I denied this 
motion. (Tr. 21-22) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d through 1.f, and 
2.a. He denied the SOR allegations under ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 2.b through 2.f. After a 
thorough review of all the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while 
testifying, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a government contractor. After graduating 
from high school, he attended college and accumulated approximately 70 college 
credits, but did not complete a degree. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1985 to 1988. 
During his service, Applicant had access to classified information at the secret level. His 
service was characterized as under honorable conditions, and he received a general 
discharge. Applicant married his first wife in 1981, and they divorced in 1983. He 
married his second wife in 1988, and they divorced in February 2013. He has two 
children, ages 23 and 22. He was hired by his current employer in November 2010. This 
is his first SCA since he was discharged from the Navy in 1988. 
 
In 1990, at age 31-32, Applicant was charged with felony embezzlement. He pled 
guilty to an amended charge of misdemeanor petit larceny in 1991. In 2004, at age 45, 
Applicant was charged again with felony embezzlement. In 2006, he pled guilty to an 
amended charge of misdemeanor petit larceny. On both occasions, he was fined, 
ordered to pay restitution, and sentenced to 12 months of imprisonment (suspended).  
 
3 
 
 
 
Section 22 (Police Record) of Applicant’s December 2010 SCA, asked him to 
disclose whether he had ever been charged with any felony offense. He answered “No” 
and denied he had ever been charged with any felony offense. He disclosed; however, 
that in August 2004, he and three fellow employees were charged with conspiring to 
embezzle from his then employer through a number of different schemes. He stated that 
although he was indicted on a conspiracy to embezzle, “the verdict was a 
misdemeanor” – that he “accepted a reduced charge of one misdemeanor.” (SCA 
Section 13A (Employment/Unemployment Information), Section 13C (Employment 
Record), and Section 22 (Police Record).  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in December 2010. 
When asked why he did not disclose he was charged with a felony embezzlement 
charge in 2004, he explained he pled guilty in 2006 to an amended misdemeanor 
charge. He believed that because the original felony charge was amended, the only 
remaining charge was the amended misdemeanor. 
 
Applicant was also asked whether he had any additional past arrests or criminal 
charges. He answered “No,” and deliberately failed to disclose his 1990 felony 
embezzlement charge. When asked why he failed to disclose his 1990 felony 
embezzlement charge, Applicant claimed he misread the question, and he believed he 
only had to disclose criminal activity within a ten year scope. 
 
During December 29, 2010 and February 22, 2011 interviews with government 
investigators, Applicant was asked to discuss the 2004 felony embezzlement charge 
against him. Applicant denied any criminal misconduct and stated that he was unfairly 
accused of stealing gas, for possessing and using an unauthorized gas card, and for 
stealing blank checks and money from his employer. Applicant failed to disclose he was 
also accused of stealing software, paying repairs to his truck with company money, 
paying improvements to his home with company funds, and paying for personal service 
contracts using company funds.  
 
Applicant considers himself to be an honest, truthful, and upstanding individual. 
He claimed he always tries to do his best, and to make the correct decisions. His friends 
and coworkers believe him to be a hard worker who receives excellent performance 
reviews, and exceeds expectations. Because of his outstanding performance he was 
recently nominated to receive a company award. 
 
Applicant claimed he never tried to falsify or to mislead the Government with his 
answers to the SCA. He testified his answers were based on the knowledge he had at 
the time he answered the questions. He attributed his false answers to a 
misunderstanding. He believed that when he pled guilty in 2006 to an amended charge, 
the original felony charge no longer existed and he did not have to disclose the felony 
charge. Considering Applicant’s age at the time of both offenses, his experiences with 
the criminal justice system, his demeanor while testifying, and his testimony in light of 
 
4 
 
 
the substantial evidence available, Applicant’s claims of a misunderstanding and lack of 
knowledge are not credible. 
 
Applicant testified he took the Mensa test and qualified to be a member of the 
Mensa organization. He also contributed to his community through his involvement in 
the leadership of the Boys Scouts of America. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government’s concern is that criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations. AG ¶ 30.  
 
In 1990, Applicant was charged with a felony embezzlement offense. In 1991, he 
pled guilty to a reduced charge of misdemeanor petit larceny. In 2004, Applicant was 
charged with a felony embezzlement offense. In 2005, he pled guilty to a reduced 
charge of misdemeanor petit larceny. He deliberately falsified his December 2010 SCA 
when he failed to disclose he was charged with felony embezzlement offenses in 1990 
and 2004. He made false statements to government investigators in December 2010, 
when he sought to conceal his 1990 felony charge, and when he tried to minimize his 
2004 criminal conduct. He also attempted to minimize his criminal conduct, and 
concealed the 2004 criminal allegations against him during a February 2011 interview 
with a government investigator. Applicant’s behavior raises security concerns under AG 
¶ 31(a) “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation 
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally 
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline J 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 1990 offense occurred 23 years ago, and his 
2004 offense is nine years old. Notwithstanding the passage of time, his offenses, in 
conjunction with his current false statements, cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
 
6 
 
 
trustworthiness, and judgment. Applicant falsified his 2010 SCA and misrepresented 
facts during his 2010 and 2011 interviews to minimize his criminal behavior. He was 
less than candid and forthcoming during his interviews discussing the criminal 
allegations against him. Instead, he minimized his criminal behavior.  
 
 Applicant failed to present convincing evidence of successful rehabilitation. He 
expressed no remorse for his criminal behavior in 1990 or in 2004. To the contrary, 
Applicant continues to argue that he was the victim of a misunderstanding, and had 
legal authority for his misappropriation of funds, property, and for the payment of 
personal services using company funds. 
 
 Considering Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, and his testimony in light of 
the evidence as a whole, I find that the criminal incidents and falsifications, continue to 
cast serious doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and on 
his ability to follow the law.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The SOR cross alleges under Guideline E, in substance, the same factual 
allegations discussed above under Guideline J. For the sake of brevity, the discussion 
under Guideline J, whenever relevant, is incorporated herein.  
 
  Applicant deliberately falsified his December 2010 SCA when he failed to 
disclose he was charged with felony embezzlement offenses in 1990 and 2004. He 
made false statements to a government investigator in December 2010, when he 
sought to conceal his 1990 felony charge, and when he tried to minimize his 2004 
criminal conduct, and concealed the allegations against him. He also attempted to 
minimize his criminal conduct, and concealed the 2004 criminal allegations against him 
during a February 2011 interview with a government investigator.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
7 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
 
8 
 
 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant’s 1990 and 2004 felony charges and his subsequent guilty 
pleas to misdemeanor petit larceny offenses occurred many years ago. 
Notwithstanding, his falsification to the 2010 SCA and his 2010 and 2011 false 
statements to government investigators are recent. These falsifications and false 
statements bring to the forefront the 1990 and 2004 offenses. Applicant falsifications 
constitute felony offenses in violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001. His actions and 
criminal conduct continue to raise serious questions about his judgment, 
trustworthiness, reliability, and his ability to protect classified information. 
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 2.b, I find the evidence presented insufficient to establish 
Applicant violated company rules and regulations concerning the accessing of 
pornographic materials using his office computer. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant, 54, served in the Navy three years and his service was characterized 
as under honorable conditions. He has been working for a government contractor since 
November 2010. He considers himself to be an honest, hardworking, and productive 
employee. His references and performance appraisals indicate he is a valuable 
employee, a dedicated father, a long-term Boy Scout leader, and a member of Mensa. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s criminal conduct and falsifications cast serious doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and on his ability to follow the law.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.d:      Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.c-2.f:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.b:       For Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
