 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 11-09910 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, Applicant's request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) setting forth security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 Applicant signed 
his notarized Answer to the SOR on March 8, 2013, in which he admitted all of the 
allegations under Guideline B. He also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. 
 
The case was assigned to me on April 24, 2013. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on May 10, 2013. At the hearing on June 5, 2013, I admitted two Government 
                                                 
1 See Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
  
 
 
2 
exhibits, (GE 1 and 2) and four Applicant exhibits (AE A–D). DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 13, 2013. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to India. They are set forth in 15 
documents offered by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are 
limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 43 years old, was born in India. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
India in 1992. He came to the United States that year, at the age of 23, and earned a 
master’s degree in 1995. He married an Indian citizen in 1997. Applicant, his wife and 
their two children, who are 10 and 13 years old, became U.S. citizens in 2010. Between 
2000 and 2009, Applicant was employed as an information technology manager. He is 
currently a senior application programmer for a federal defense contractor, where he 
has been employed since 2009. This is his first application for a security clearance. (GE 
1; Tr. 17-20, 39) 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His mother has always 
been a homemaker. His father, 75 years old, was a finance department accounts officer 
for a state government in India from 1961 to 1995. He has been retired for about 18 
years, and is ill with cancer. He receives a monthly government pension. Applicant 
speaks with them once per week. His parents visited him in the United States twice, 
most recently in 2008. Applicant travels to India once every two or three years. (GE 1, 2; 
Tr. 26-28, 32-34) 
 
Applicant’s sister, her husband, and their two children are citizens and residents 
of India. She is a homemaker, and her husband is a self-employed real estate agent. 
They have two sons. Applicant's 24-year-old nephew is a software engineer for a private 
company. His 22-year-old nephew is a student. Applicant talks with his sister and 
brother-in-law about once per month, and with his nephews about once every two or 
three months. Applicant's wife also has family members who are citizen-residents of 
India. His mother-in-law, who is 58 years old, has held a clerical job in a state hospital 
since 1976. She reviews purchase orders for hospital supplies. Applicant's wife’s 
brother and his wife work at a privately owned software training center. Applicant 
testified he and his wife have a close relationship with their families. He also testified 
that, “. . . they don't influence my life in any way, because like I have my own family 
here, my wife and children . . .” (GE 1, 2; Tr. 15, 28-30, 32-35) 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant has two bank accounts in India. He keeps funds there to help his father 
pay for his cancer treatments. For the past four or five years, he has sent $400 to $500 
monthly to the accounts. In his 2011 security clearance application, he listed the 
balances at $5,000 and $10,000. At the hearing, he said the balances have decreased 
to between $400 and $600 each. He also stated that he has tried to close them, but 
learned that he would have to travel to India to do so. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 15-16, 24-25, 36) 
 
In April 2000, Applicant purchased an undeveloped lot in India for about $10,000. 
He thought he might build a house for his family in India, but he has not built on the 
property. When Applicant completed his security clearance application in March 2011, 
he estimated the value at $200,000. At the hearing, he stated he has had it appraised, 
and the value is $125,000. Unless he needs the funds for some unexpected event, he 
plans to to sell the lot in the future to finance his children’s college educations in the 
United States. (GE 1; AE B; Tr. 16, 23-24, 32-33)  
 
Applicant's assets in the United States include two properties. His primary 
residence is worth $553,920. A rental unit that he owns, which was his previous 
residence, has been assessed at $249,000. His retirement fund has a balance of about 
$300,000. He has savings and checking accounts totaling more than $38,000, an 
education fund for his children valued at about $18,000, and investment accounts of 
$38,500. (AE A, C, D; Tr. 16-17. 20-22, 25-26, 36-37) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Republic of India (India) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. India is a sovereign, secular 
democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy with a 
bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 1.2 billion. Since gaining 
independence in 1947, India has had a tumultuous history, and continues to 
experience terrorist and insurgent activities.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. The most significant human rights problems are security force 
abuses including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape. Authorities infringe on citizens’ 
privacy rights, and widespread corruption at all levels of government continues. 
 
India, along with other countries, has been involved in criminal espionage and 
cases involving violation of U.S. export controls. Cases have involved the illegal export, 
or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including 
technology and equipment which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of 
diversion to programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their 
means of delivery. Governmental and private entities, including intelligence 
organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of 
U.S. technology.  
 
 
4 
Despite past differences regarding India’s nuclear weapons program, and its 
cooperation with Iran in some policy areas, the United States recognizes India as key 
to its strategic interests and has sought to strengthen the relationship. The two 
countries are the world’s largest democracies, both committed to political freedom 
protected by representative government, and share common interests in the free flow 
of commerce, fighting terrorism, and creating a strategically stable Asia.  
 
India remains one of the world’s most terrorism-afflicted countries. India and the 
United States are partners in the fight against global terrorism. A Bilateral 
Counterterrorism Cooperation Initiative was formally launched in July 2010. As of 2011, 
the number of terrorist-related deaths had decreased compared to 2010. The State 
Department’s Anti-Terrorism Assistance program has conducted scores of training 
courses for more than 1,600 Indian law enforcement officials. In May 2011, a U.S.-
India Homeland Security dialogue was established to foster cooperation on numerous 
law enforcement issues. As of November 2012, counter-terrorism cooperation with 
India was described by the Obama administration as a “pillar of the bilateral 
relationship” between the two countries.  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the (AG).2 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.4 A 
                                                 
2 Directive. 6.3. 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
5 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern related to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are relevant: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
                                                 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant has ties of affection for his parents, sister, nephews, and in-laws, who 
are citizen-residents of India. His contact with them varies from once per week for his 
parents, to once every two or three months for his nephews. He visits India every few 
years, and his parents visited him in the United States twice. He has been helping his 
father financially for several years by providing funds for his cancer treatment. Such 
ties constitute a heightened risk of foreign influence. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and (b) apply. Applicant also has a plot of land and two bank accounts in India, 
and ¶ 7(e) applies. 
 
The foreign influence guideline also includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives 
in a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that 
relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. Here, Applicant has 
ties to his parents, sister, in-laws, and nephews in India. His mother-in-law is a state 
government administrative worker. His father was a state government employee, but 
has not held that position for more than 17 years. However, the nature of the foreign 
country must also be considered in evaluating the likelihood of exploitation. The United 
States and India have a long-standing, stable relationship, and share common strategic 
goals. India is a democracy and a partner in combating terrorism. Given the nature of 
the country involved, it is unlikely that the government would exploit Applicant or his 
relatives based on their relationship. It is unlikely that Applicant would have to choose 
 
 
7 
between the interests of his family in India and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 
8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has ties to his family in India. He is in touch with them by telephone, 
and visits once every few years. He has assisted his father with funds for his medical 
treatment. However, Applicant has strong ties to the United States, which weigh in his 
favor when evaluating the question of exploitation or potential conflicts of interest 
based on ties to India. He has established his life in the United States by living and 
working here for more than 20 years. He, his wife, and his children are U.S. citizens. 
He credibly testified that his family in the United States is more important to him, and 
that his foreign family members have no influence over his life. I conclude that 
Applicant would choose his U.S. ties over his foreign connections, in the event a 
conflict of interest arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Applicant has two bank accounts and one plot of undeveloped land in India. The 
bank accounts have a current value of about $600 each. The land is now worth about 
$125,000. His total assets in India are worth $126,200. He has substantially more in 
assets and investments in the United States. His U.S. real estate is worth $803,000, 
and his cash and investments total $394,500. These U.S. assets amount to almost 
$1.2 million. It is unlikely that his assets in India, which represent about a tenth of his 
U.S. assets, could be used effectively to coerce him. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(f) 
applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 
 
8 
Applicant chose to come to the United States to further his education. He has 
built his life here for more than 20 years. He has worked for U.S. companies for many 
years. Applicant, his wife, and children are all U.S. citizens. He has accrued substantial 
financial assets in the United States. Applicant's ties to India are outweighed by his ties 
to the United States. Applicant’s history demonstrates that he has built strong ties here, 
and he is unlikely to jeopardize them by making decisions that would harm the United 
States. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h     For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
