 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-05970 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 28, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that her 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether her clearance 
should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 11, 2012, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated January 16, 2013, was provided to her by letter dated January 
16, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on January 28, 2013. She was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.  
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a letter dated January 30, 2013, in 
which she requested that a decision based on her FORM be delayed until she had an 
opportunity to submit additional material. On April 18, 2013, Department Counsel 
indicated that as of that date, he had not received any additional material from the 
Applicant and forwarded her FORM.  The case was assigned to me on April 23, 2013.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR under Guideline F consists of two separate allegations. Applicant 
denied SOR ¶ 1.a stating that this account was paid in full, and denied SOR ¶ 1.b 
stating that she had been making monthly $250 payments on this account to a law firm. 
Applicant’s admissions and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old custodian, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2000. She attended a technical school from 1986 to 1987. 
Applicant has been married since 1989 and has two adult children. She did not serve in 
the armed forces nor has she previously held a security clearance. (Item 5.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a incorrectly alleges a federal tax lien for $1,147. The 
allegation should have alleged a state tax lien, which is supported by Applicant’s credit 
report. (Item 9.) Applicant’s SOR answer stated that this lien was paid in 1993 – 1994. 
The Government has provided a separate exhibit which verified that a state tax lien in 
the amount in question was released on January 27, 1994. (Item 12.) SOR ¶ 1.a 
apparently was incorrectly alleged as a federal tax lien when it was in fact a state tax 
lien, and the state tax lien has been satisfied. This debt is no longer a concern. 
 
With regard to SOR ¶ 1.b, which is a charged-off $15,000 debt to a credit card 
company, Applicant stated that she was making $250 monthly payments for this debt to 
                                                          
1
 On June 24, 2013, I confirmed with Department Counsel by e-mail that he had not received any 
additional documentation from the Applicant. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
a law office, with an unpaid balance of $1,941. (Item 4.) Applicant did not provide 
documentation corroborating her statement. (Items 8 and 12.) 
 
Applicant disclosed several adverse areas regarding her financial history during 
her Office of Personnel Management (OPM) December 2010 interview. She noted 
debts not previously disclosed in her e-QIP. She disclosed a 2010 foreclosure, and 
explained that her home went into foreclosure after she and her spouse were unable to 
make full house payments in 2008 to 2009 as a result of reduced income. Applicant 
stated that her spouse unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate a reduced mortgage 
payment. She moved out of her home in February 2010 and the bank foreclosed. 
Applicant has no intention to contact the bank to make deficiency payments since she 
does not live there anymore. Her January 2013 credit report indicates the bank 
charged-off the home equity debt after foreclosure. (Item 6.) 
 
Additionally, when Applicant was confronted by the OPM investigator, she was 
not familiar with the $15,000 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b., but was going to 
check with her spouse. (Item 6.) In her later response to financial interrogatories, she 
did not provide any information regarding this debt. (Item 7.) Her current credit report 
indicated this account, in the amount of $15,057, was charged-off. As noted above, 
Applicant claimed in her SOR answer that this account was being paid off to a law firm, 
but provided no documentation that the law firm was collecting for this particular debt 
and that consistent payments were being made as claimed. Lastly, Applicant and her 
spouse filed chapter 7 bankruptcy in October 1993, which was discharged in February 
1994. (Item 13.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) indicates that she and her spouse 
have a net monthly remainder of $552; however, her PFS does not show payments 
toward the law firm as she claimed in her SOR answer. (Item 13.) Applicant presented 
no evidence that she has participated in financial counseling or that she is following a 
viable budget.  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”2 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
 
                                                          
2
 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 
1994). 
 
3 “
The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The Government substantiated its security concern under this Guideline through 
the evidence submitted. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a appears paid or resolved. 
However, the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is unresolved.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports and in her OPM interview.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,4 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
except for the debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. With regard to that debt, application of ¶ 
20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts, is appropriate. Applicant presented no evidence before after or after 
receipt of her FORM documenting efforts taken to contact creditors, or to resolve any of 
her other outstanding debts since she acquired them.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In fairness to 
the Applicant, this decision should not be construed as a determination that the 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of financial stability necessary to justify the 
award of a DoD security clearance. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to 
reapply for a security clearance in the future, she may well demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of her security worthiness. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she 
is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
5
 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
