In February 2013, scheduling of new cases was stopped due to budget constraints. This resulted in a      1
notable delay in scheduling. W hen scheduling resumed in late March, Applicant and Counsel chose the
earliest scheduled date in May 2013. 
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )
 )
)       ISCR Case No. 11-01326
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
The SOR was dated April 25, 2012. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 31. 2013 . A notice of1
hearing was issued on April 8, 2013, scheduling the hearing for May 23, 2013.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-5 were admitted into evidence, without objection. Applicant
2
testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-B, which were admitted without
objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 3, 2013. Based on a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), with explanations. 
Applicant is a 37-year-old security analyst employed by a defense contractor. He
graduated from high school and attended technical college for two years. He is married
and has two children. Applicant has held a security clearance since 2002. (Tr. 31) He
has been with his current employer since October 2012 . (Tr. 25 )
The SOR alleges three debts for 2008, 2009, and 2010 federal taxes ($28,000)
and a fourth debt for a real estate mortgage collection account ($94,990). (GX 5)
In 2007, Applicant purchased a $530,000 home. (Tr. 42) He bought this home
before selling his current residence. Applicant had a first and second mortgage loan on
the home which totaled approximately $350,000. When the home finally sold via a short
sale in 2009 for about $220,000, the first mortgage loan was absolved. Applicant still
had a second mortgage loan in the amount of $94,900 on his first home. In 2009,
Applicant began a payment plan of $500 a month. In 2011, however, he skipped
payments and resumed some reduced payments in 2012. He provided documentation
of his payments. (AX B) He began making regular monthly payments again in March
2013. Due to interest charges, his balance is approximately $95,000. (GX 4)
Applicant claimed that he did not realize until 2010, that he had any tax issues.
(GX 4) He was assessed additional taxes for unreported income. He failed to withhold
sufficient tax resulting in about $27,000 for the years 2008, 2009, and 2010. He began
an installment agreement with the IRS in April 2010, but discontinued the plan in
September 2010. He could provide no valid reason for discontinuing the $1,000
monthly payment. 
Applicant paid the overdue 2008 taxes in 2012. (GX 3)  He used his wife’s credit
card to make the $3,178 payment. (Tr. 38) Applicant paid the 2009 taxes for $1,077 in
August 2012, by using the same credit card. (Tr. 40) Applicant has not resolved the
2010 tax issue for approximately $23,000. Although he started another installment plan
in June 2011, he stopped paying in October 2012. Applicant recently began another
installment plan for the 2010 taxes. He promises to pay $1,000 month. He provided
documentation that he has made paid $6,000 to date. (Tr. 46)  He has approximately
$10,000 in credit card debt as a result of paying the overdue taxes. 
When Applicant’s security clearance was revoked, Applicant was unemployed for
about three months in 2012. He was paid during those months as a result of his
personal hours he had accrued. However, his salary in 2008 was $188,000, in 2009
3
about $164,000, in 2010, approximately $233,000, and in 2012 approximately
$221,000. He currently earns approximately $190,000. He admits that he did not pay
attention to his finances. He did not accept employment in 2011 that could have
enabled him to pay his taxes and other debts. He could not account for the money that
he earned and has spent. 
 Applicant accepted full responsibility for the status of his financial issues. He
repeatedly stated that he had no excuse. The revocation of his security clearance was a
“wake-up call.” (Tr. 13) He explained that he was working two jobs and did not attend to
his financial issues. He admitted that he used poor judgment and let bills lapse. From
2008 until 2012, his financial status was precarious. Despite significant earnings, he did
not follow through with his tax payments. He states that his 2011 taxes are on  schedule
to be paid every month. He begins his quarterly tax payments for 2012 in June 2013.
(Tr. 14) 
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $14,600. After expenses, he
believes he has about $2,000 net monthly remainder. His wife does not work. She is
currently responsible for paying the bills. He has not received any financial counseling. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
5
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
relevant:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant admits that he owed the federal government for tax years 2008, 2009,
and 2010. He also has a mortgage collection account for about $95,000. Consequently,
the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying condition ¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant acknowledges that he used poor judgment and did not keep track of
paying taxes or bills despite a significant income. He made no excuses for his financial
situation. He also accepted responsibility for buying a new home before selling his
previous home. He has started installment plans with both the IRS and the mortgage
collection account holder, but he did not make consistent or continuous payments on
either.  He recently paid his 2008 and 2009 taxes, but used a credit card to do so. As a
result, he and his wife have acquired $10,000 in credit card debt.  He has started again
to pay $1,000 monthly on his 2010 taxes. He has made about three or four consecutive
monthly payments on the second mortgage collection account. He has not had any
financial counseling. He has no sound or consistent track record of payment history.
AG ¶ 20 (d) partially applies. He has not mitigated the security concerns under the
financial considerations guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
7
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of defense contractor who has held a security
clearance since 2000. He is married and has two children. Applicant was briefly
unemployed in 2012, but received pay due to his earned personal leave. He was candid
at the hearing that he has no excuses for his poor financial situation. He did not have
any valid reason for not paying his federal taxes. He earned a significant salary for the
six past years, but could not maintain the installment plans that he started in 2009. He
recently paid his tax bill for 2008 and 2009 by using a credit card. Applicant has not
maintained consistent payment plans with the IRS or the mortgage account holder
since 2009. Applicant has not met his  burden of proof in this case.  Security concerns
remain unmitigated. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
8
