 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-12137 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 2, 2008. On January 
7, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 2, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 
18, 2013, and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on March 28, 2013. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
April 8, 2013, scheduling the hearing to be conducted by video teleconference on April 
 
2 
 
23, 2013. The hearing was cancelled because of budget constraints and the 
unavailability of video teleconferencing equipment in the area where Applicant lives and 
works. The case was reassigned to me on May 8, 2013, and DOHA issued a second 
notice of hearing on May 15, 2013, scheduling the hearing for June 4, 2013. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 1 
through 15, which were admitted without objection. The exhibit lists for GX 1 through 3 
and AX 1 through 15 are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II.  
 
I kept the record open until June 11, 2013, to enable Applicant to submit 
additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX 16 through 19, which were 
admitted without objection. On June 13, 2013, Applicant submitted AX 20. Department 
Counsel did not object to the untimely submission, and it was admitted. Department 
Counsel’s comments regarding AX 16 through 20 are attached to the record as HX III 
and IV. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 13, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR 
except SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n, which he denied. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old analyst employed by a defense contractor since June 
2007. He has worked for defense contractors since January 1999. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Army from February 1977 to May 1983. He has held a security 
clearance since July 2002.  
 
 Applicant married in January 1984. He and his wife have two sons, ages 29 and 
22. The older son is an Army veteran of the war in Iraq, and the younger son is an 
active-duty soldier recently returned from Afghanistan. (Tr. 38.) 
 
 Applicant began to have financial problems during 1998 through 2003, when he 
was working away from home and maintaining two households. (GX 2 at 5.) He and his 
wife bought a house that they could not afford in 2001. About three or four months after 
they moved into the house, his wife was diagnosed with breast cancer and unable to 
work while receiving treatment. (Tr. 64.) 
 
In July 2011, Applicant was diagnosed with heart problems that required that a 
stent be implanted. Six months later, his wife was diagnosed with diabetes and was 
hospitalized. Four months later, she was hospitalized again for severe hypertension. 
(Tr. 42-43.) 
 
In 2013, Applicant’s employer initiated a medical incentive plan that entitled him 
and his wife to $600 apiece per year for medical expenses. He is exploring ways to use 
his medical incentive money to defray some of his medical bills. (Tr. 45.) 
 
 
3 
 
The evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b, judgments for $1,036 and $984. These judgments were listed 
as “medical” on Applicant’s credit bureau report (CBR) dated September 25, 2012. 
However, he submitted evidence that the plaintiff in both cases was his landlord, and 
the judgments were for unpaid rent. Both judgments have been satisfied. (AX 12 at 2; 
AX 14; AX 16.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.f, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l, delinquent medical bills for $695, $142, $122, 
$161, $182, $256, and $41. Applicant testified that all his medical bills are being 
collected by the same collection agency, and he is making monthly payments to the 
agency. (AX A; Tr. 66-67.) Applicant submitted a list of medical debts being handled by 
the same collection agency. Several of the amounts are similar to the debts alleged in 
the SOR, but the account numbers are different. His evidence does not indicate whether 
the account numbers were assigned by the collection agency or the original creditor. His 
evidence reflects that the total amount of medical debts has been reduced from $3,284 
to $2,224. (AX 17.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g, cable bill for $285. In his response to DOHA interrogatories in 
October 2012, Applicant stated that he would pay this debt in full on November 2, 2012. 
(GX 2 at 14.) At the hearing, he submitted evidence of a $25 payment on April 19, 2013 
“to show good faith” and promised to make an additional payment on May 17, 2013. (AX 
2.) There is no evidence that he made the May 2013 payment. He testified that he is 
able to pay the debt in full, but he is trying to resolve some of his larger debts first. (Tr. 
70-71.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h, internet service bill for $1,312. Applicant is disputing the amount of 
this debt. He asserts that the creditor did not adequately disclose the high cost of 
streaming large amounts of internet data. His family used the internet to watch movies 
and listen to music, without realizing that they were being billed for the amount of data 
that was transmitted. He sent the creditor two letters in 2009, complaining about 
misrepresentation of the costs of the program, but he has not received a response. He 
cancelled the service in 2009. He testified that he “believed” that he wrote another letter 
to the creditor in early 2012, while he was hospitalized, but he did not provide a copy of 
the letter. He did not submit any documentary evidence of his contract with the internet 
provider or identify any specific language that he believed was deceptive or deficient. 
(Tr. 71-76; GX 2 at 20-21.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j, collection account for $165. This debt has been paid in full. (AX 3; 
AX 15.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m, credit card account charged off for $409. Applicant testified that 
he opened this account to restore his credit. The account required that he keep $200 on 
deposit, and he could not charge more than he had on deposit. When he noticed 
numerous fees being added to his account, he cancelled it, and received a bill for $409. 
 
4 
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories in October 2012, he submitted a spreadsheet 
reflecting that he intended to pay $180 on this account on November 16, 2012; $100 on 
November 30, 2012; and $49 on December 14, 2012. (GX 2 at 14, 16.) At the hearing, 
he testified that he disputed the account with the creditor, who has not responded. He 
testified that a copy of his letter to the creditor was on a computer hard drive that 
malfunctioned and became unusable. (Tr.77-79.) He filed a dispute with the credit 
reporting agencies in October 2012. He was informed that the information in his dispute 
letter was incomplete, but he had not yet resubmitted it as of the date of the hearing. 
(Tr. 81-82; AX 8.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n, telephone bill placed for collection for $156. Applicant disputed 
this debt on the ground that he has never had an account with the creditor. He testified 
that he called the creditor, who was unable to find an account in his name. (Tr. 79-80.) 
He filed a dispute with the credit reporting agencies in October 2012, but he was 
informed that it was incomplete, and he had not yet resubmitted it as of the date of the 
hearing. (Tr. 81-82; AX 6; AX 8.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o, credit card account in collection for $2,738. Applicant testified that 
this account was for a company credit card issued to him by a former employer. He 
exceeded his credit limit and the debt was being collected by payroll deduction until he 
changed employers. He has not contacted the creditor or taken any action to resolve 
this debt. (Tr. 83-84.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p, delinquent mortgage in foreclosure, with a balance due of 
$225,000. Applicant and his wife purchased a home for $225,000 in 2001, with no down 
payment. They financed the purchase with a loan for 80% of the purchase price secured 
by a first mortgage, and a loan for 20% of the purchase price secured by a second 
mortgage. Their initial monthly payment was about $1,385. Applicant testified that they 
soon realized that they could not afford the house payments. (Tr. 52-53.) They 
refinanced several times when expenses such as insurance increased.  
 
Applicant’s wife and younger son lived in the home, and Applicant maintained a 
second residence at his place of duty in another state. They began having difficulty 
making the payments in mid-2006. In July 2007, his older son returned from overseas 
with his wife and three children, and was discharged from the Army. They lived with 
Applicant and his wife for six months, during which time his son was unemployed. 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in August 2007, in an effort to prevent 
foreclosure of his home. The petition was dismissed in January 2008. (GX 3 at 1.) The 
record does not reflect the reason for dismissal of the petition. 
 
Applicant’s September 2012 CBR reflected that foreclosure was started, and that 
the date of last activity was October 2006. (GX 3 at 2.) As of May 2008, past-due 
payments totaled about $32,000 (Tr. 56-57; GX 2 at 6.) Applicant tried to modify the 
loan by adding the past-due payments to the balance of the loan, but the lender would 
not agree. (Tr. 57.) He testified that, in September 2008, he received a telephone call 
from a realtor, informing him that the house had been sold and offering him “cash for 
 
5 
 
keys” in the amount of $1,200. Applicant accepted the offer and moved out of the 
house. (Tr. 60-60, 93.) He testified that he never received an IRS Form 1099-A or 1099-
C reflecting the sale of the house. He testified that he contacted the lender who 
foreclosed on the property and the bank that bought the house and resold it, but was 
unable to obtain any documentation of the sale. (Tr. 63.) He did not submit any 
documentary evidence reflecting the status of the foreclosure or the resolution of any 
deficiency.1  
 
In his response to DOHA interrogatories in October 2012, Applicant submitted a 
personal financial statement reflecting net monthly income of $5,652, expenses of 
$2,557, and a net remainder of $3,095. He reported that he owned a 12-year-old truck, 
on which he made the final payment in October 2012. (GX 2 at 23.) At the hearing, he 
testified that his monthly gross income had increased by about $100, but his medical 
expenses had increased, reducing his net remainder to about $1,500, which he is using 
to pay his delinquent debts. He testified that he had a written budget “at one time,” but 
that it has been overcome by the cost of his wife’s prescriptions and urgent 
maintenance on his truck. (Tr. 88.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
1 Before adjourning the hearing, I pointed out to Applicant that any sale of the property should be reflected 
in public records that usually are available on government web sites. However, he did not submit any 
further evidence about the foreclosure in his post-hearing submission. 
 
6 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
7 
 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his September 2012 CBR, establish the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) His admission that he 
purchased a home that he could not afford establishes AG ¶ 19(e) (“consistent 
spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial 
analysis”). 
 
 A security clearance adjudication evaluates an individual’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
(App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required, as a matter of law, to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR 
be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, many 
are unresolved, and they did not occur under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant encountered several conditions 
beyond his control: his wife’s medical problems, his medical problems, and the financial 
problems of his son. The expenses incurred to maintain two households were a matter 
of choice, not a condition beyond his control. Applicant has acted responsibly regarding 
his medical bills. It is difficult to track the medical bills, because the original creditors are 
not reflected on the CBR, and the account numbers appear to have changed as the 
debts were purchased or transferred. However, the evidence reflects that Applicant has 
diligently tried to resolve his medical bills. He has resolved the two judgments for unpaid 
rent alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He resolved the collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.j. However, he has not acted responsibly regarding the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 
1.j, 1.m, and 1.n-1.p. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant would have received financial counseling 
as a prerequisite for his petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in August 2007, but his 
financial problems are not yet under control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the two judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b; 
the medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.f, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l; and the collection account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. It is not established for the delinquent cable bill alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.g, because Applicant has repeatedly promised to pay the bill in full, admitted at the 
hearing that he is able to pay it in full, but has made only one token payment of $25.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the disputed telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. I 
found Applicant’s testimony that he never had an account with this creditor credible. 
However, this mitigating condition is not established for the internet service bill alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.h or the credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. While it appears that 
Applicant did not fully understand the terms of his contracts with the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 
1.h and 1.m, he has not shown that the contracts were deceptive or unclear. In his 
October 2012 response to DOHA interrogatories, he promised to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.m, and he has not satisfactorily explained why he decided to dispute a bill that he 
previously promised to pay. Thus, he has not established a “reasonable basis” for 
disputing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.m. Furthermore, after learning that his dispute 
letters for these two debts were incomplete, he had not resubmitted them as of the date 
of the hearing.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
 
9 
 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army, and he has served as a contractor 
employee and held a clearance for many years. He has incurred medical expenses for 
himself and his wife, and he is systematically paying his medical debts. On the other 
hand, he has made a series of bad financial decisions, starting with the purchase of a 
home in 2001 that he could not afford, followed by an internet contract that he did not 
fully understand, and a credit card account with exorbitant fees. He has a plan to 
resolve his medical debts, but he has adopted an ad hoc approach to his other debts. 
He has put the cable service debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g on the “back burner,” even 
though he is able to pay it. He has not addressed the delinquent credit card account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o. He has not shown that the delinquent mortgage loan on his home, 
subsequent foreclosure, and any possible deficiency after foreclosure are resolved. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Paragraphs 1.a-1.f:     For Applicant 
  Paragraphs 1.g-1.h:     Against Applicant 
  Paragraphs 1.i-1.l:     For Applicant 
  Paragraph 1.m:     Against Applicant 
  Paragraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
  Paragraphs 1.o-1.p:     Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
