 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14265 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s long-term illegal use of marijuana, lack of credibility, and his 
falsification cast serious doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and 
ability to follow the law. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
June 22, 2011. On March 22, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
April 1, 2013, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on April 24, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on May 3, 2013, scheduling a hearing 
for May 22, 2013. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. 
Applicant testified and submitted one exhibit (AE) 1, comprised of Tabs A through P.  
Tab P was received post-hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 
2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted and denied, in part, the factual allegation under SOR ¶ 1.a. 
He admitted that he stated he used marijuana ten times between October 2001 and 
March 2011. He claimed he only used marijuana four times during that period. He 
admitted SOR ¶ 1.b, and partially admitted the allegation in SOR 2.a. He failed to admit 
or deny the allegation under SOR ¶ 2.b. After a thorough review of all the evidence, 
including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a government contractor. After graduating 
from high school, he enlisted in the U.S. Army where he served from June 1992 until 
August 1998. His service was characterized as under honorable conditions and he 
received a General discharge. He married his wife in May 2006. He has a 15-year-old 
son from a prior relationship. He attended college and completed his associate’s degree 
in computer science in June 2005. 
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer in July 2007, and that same month 
he submitted his first SCA. Section 24 (Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity) 
asked him to disclose whether in the last seven years he had illegally used any 
controlled substances, including marijuana. Applicant answered “Yes,” and stated that 
he used marijuana five times between October 2001 and September 2002. (GE 2) He 
was granted access to classified information at the secret level shortly thereafter. 
 
Applicant submitted his pending SCA in June 2011. Section 23 (Illegal Use of 
Drugs or Drug Activity) asked him to disclose whether in the last seven years he had 
illegally used any controlled substances, including marijuana. Applicant answered “Yes,” 
and stated that he used marijuana ten times between October 2001 and March 2011. 
(GE 1) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in September 2011 
concerning his illegal drug use. He told the investigator that he started using marijuana 
in October 2001 because he wanted to experiment. He said he used marijuana by 
himself or socially with a diverse number of friends. He used marijuana once a year 
while on vacation to relax. He used marijuana while vacationing in two foreign countries 
in September 2005 and March 2011. He estimated he used marijuana a total of ten 
times between 2001 and March 2011. Applicant told the investigator he did not intend to 
use marijuana in the future because he wanted to be a good role model for his son and 
other young adults. He denied he ever purchased or sold marijuana. He always 
 
3 
 
 
obtained it from friends. He believes that he could not be blackmailed because of his 
illegal use of marijuana because his wife and friends were aware of his marijuana use. 
(GE 3) 
 
The investigator asked Applicant why he failed to disclose in his June 2011 SCA 
that he illegally used marijuana after possessing a security clearance. Applicant 
answered it was an oversight on his part, and that he was not aware it was against 
policy to use marijuana while possessing a security clearance. (GE 3) 
 
In his April 2013 answer to the SOR and at his hearing, Applicant contradicted 
most of his prior admissions about his illegal use of marijuana. He claimed that between 
October 2001 and March 2011, he only used marijuana four times. He testified he 
illegally used marijuana in October 2001, because he was clinically depressed as a 
result of his unemployment. He used marijuana in January 2002, after his 
grandmother’s funeral. He claimed he used marijuana during a September 2005 cruise 
after he saw the devastation caused by a hurricane to the Mississippi Gulf Coast region. 
(Applicant failed to disclose in his July 2007 SCA his September 2005 illegal marijuana 
use). He also confirmed that he used marijuana in March 2011 during a vacation to 
another country, while possessing a security clearance that was granted to him in 2007. 
He considers his marijuana use in March 2011 “a stupid mistake.” 
 
Applicant claimed that he never intended to falsify or omit any information about 
his prior use of marijuana. He averred that at the time he completed the SCA he could 
not remember all of his prior marijuana use because his use was sporadic. He simply 
provided wrong information because he did not remember specific dates or events. 
Applicant claimed he has not used marijuana since March 2011. 
 
Applicant believes he has matured and that he is now a different person. He 
claimed he no longer associates with his marijuana-using friends. He is now involved in 
his community as a mentor and counselor for young adults. He teaches them how to 
avoid depression, and to stay away from alcohol and drugs. He considers himself to be 
a role model to young adults and his two subordinates at work. He also serves as a 
coach for different teams and performs as an umpire. Applicant testified he has learned 
how to handle adversity by using coping skills he learned from a therapist and his 
pastor. He submitted a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any use of illegal drugs. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be a hard worker. His references stated that he is 
respected by friends and coworkers because of his strong ethics and dedication. He is 
considered to be an asset to his employer because he is technically proficient and 
knowledgeable. He has received exceptional job performance ratings indicating that he 
regularly exceeds expectations. Because of his outstanding performance and positive 
attitude his supervisors recommend his eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
 
5 
 
 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana ten times between October 2001 and March 
2011. He used marijuana after possessing access to classified information at the secret 
level.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. The following drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline H 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s four contradictory statements about the extent of 
his illegal marijuana use establish his lack of credibility. His lack of credibility adversely 
impacts the validity of his testimony concerning his change of behavior, disassociation 
from drug-using friends, successful rehabilitation, and his ability and willingness to 
abstain from illegal drugs. On balance, Applicant’s testimony and evidence are 
insufficient to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his July 2007 SCA that he illegally used marijuana five 
times between October 2001 and September 2002. He was granted access to classified 
information at the secret level shortly thereafter.  
 
  Applicant disclosed in his June 2011 SCA, that he illegally used marijuana ten 
times between October 2001 and March 2011. He used marijuana while possessing a 
secret level security clearance in March 2011. Applicant told a government investigator 
in September 2011 that he started using marijuana in October 2001 because he wanted 
to experiment. He said he used marijuana by himself or socially with a diverse number 
of friends. He used marijuana once a year while on vacation to relax. He used 
marijuana while vacationing to two foreign countries in September 2005 and March 
2011. He estimated he used marijuana a total of ten times between 2001 and March 
2011. 
 
  Applicant deliberately falsified his July 2007 SCA when he failed to disclose he 
illegally used marijuana between 2002 and July 2007. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 
8 
 
 
For the same reasons discussed under the Guideline H, incorporated herein, I 
find that none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. On balance, Applicant’s 
testimony and evidence are insufficient to mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a government contractor. He served in the 
U.S. Army six years. His service was characterized as under honorable conditions and 
he received a General discharge. He is married and has a 15-year-old son. He 
completed an associate’s degree in computer science. 
 
Applicant has been working for a government contractor since 2007. He 
considers himself to be an honest, hardworking, and productive employee. His 
references and outstanding performance appraisals indicate he is a valuable employee, 
a dedicated father, and an esteemed volunteer in his community. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant’s long-term illegal use of marijuana, lack of credibility, and his falsification cast 
serious doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and on his ability to 
follow the law.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINS APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b:      Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b:      Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
