 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12512 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 1, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 8, 2013, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on March 29, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 12, 2013, setting the hearing for 
May 15, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted 
into evidence without objections. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as 
 
2 
 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open for Applicant 
to submit additional information. He timely submitted AE E, which was admitted into the 
record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and has worked as a supervisor for a government 
contractor for six years. He attended trade school. He is married for the second time. He 
has two adult children from his first marriage and four adult stepchildren from his 
second marriage. He has no military service, but has held a secret clearance in the 
past.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was indebted on four accounts, including two 
judgments, one consumer debt, and a second mortgage. The debts were listed on a 
credit report dated January 24, 2013. Applicant admitted all the debts, but indicated that 
he made payment arrangements for each of them.2  
 
 In 2007, Applicant acquired a four-unit apartment building from his parents. The 
building was in need of major repairs and renovation. The property was gifted to 
Applicant, and because of this he was unable to acquire financing to renovate the 
building for some time. Unbeknownst to him, his wife secured a loan from a high-
interest lender so that they would have the resources to renovate the building. They ran 
into financial difficulties when they could not pay their regular debts after paying the 
monthly payments on the high-interest loan. Applicant received assistance from his 
parents who paid the balance on the high-interest loan. He plans to pay them back 
when he has the four-unit apartment fully rented and can acquire an equity loan against 
the property. In 2009, he hired a debt consolidation company to establish a payment 
plan for his debts. He has used the plan to pay off several overdue debts, including the 
debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. That debt was paid in April 2013. The debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and1.b were judgments entered against Applicant by his homeowner’s association 
for delinquent fees and assessments. Applicant satisfied both judgments in December 
2012. The last delinquent debt listed in the SOR was a second mortgage on his 
residence. Applicant settled this account and received a satisfaction and release of lien 
document indicating that this debt was fully paid. He has no other outstanding 
delinquent obligations.3   
 
 Applicant has completed the renovation on two units in the apartment building 
and is currently renting those. When he completes the renovation of the other two 
apartments, he will be able to rent those and receive approximately $4,000 per month 
rental income from the building. There is no mortgage on the property. Applicant and his 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7-8, 31-32; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 32-42, 61; AE A-F; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
wife both work and their combined net income shows that they have a sufficient 
remainder each month after paying their obligations.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 47-48, 51-54; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts and judgments filed against him. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c). 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The judgments and delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent. He has 
paid all debts. Since he has no other delinquent debts in other areas of his life, it is 
reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant’s debts were within his control to make timely payments. He failed to 
do so. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant sought financial counseling in 2009 and continued with the program 
they established until all his debts were paid. There are clear indications that all the 
debts and liens have been resolved through payment. He made good-faith efforts to 
resolve all the debts listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence showing 
payment for all those debts. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his 
debt and judgment liability. He paid all the debts. I found nothing to indicate a likelihood 
that Applicant would find himself in a similar future situation.  
 
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
