1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-12921
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
                                                     For Applicant: Pro se                                                     
                      
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On March 12, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to the above-
referenced Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR). The SOR enumerated security
concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). DOD took action under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.   
Applicant submitted a timely response to the SOR and requested a hearing
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. The
case was assigned to me on May 14, 2013. The parties agreed to a hearing date of
June 13, 2013. A notice setting the hearing for that date was issued on May 16, 2013. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony and offered
one document, which was accepted without objection as exhibit (Ex.) A. The
Government offered five documents, which were accepted into the record without
objection as Exs. 1-5. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received on June 21,
2013, and the record was closed. Based on a review of the testimony, official case file,
 Tr. 52-53. In starting his own business, Applicant cashed in all of his savings. This included a property      1
going into foreclosure, although final action on that foreclosure was diverted through the help of an efficient
realtor. Otherwise, family loans helped him face his fiscal needs while his business was starting to generate
income.
 Tr. 55-57.      2
 Tr. 26-27.       3
2
and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden of mitigating security concerns
related to financial considerations. Clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior operations analyst who has worked for the
same defense contractor for the past three-and-a-half years. He served in the U.S. Air
Force for 30 years and has maintained a security clearance without incident since he
was 18 years old. Applicant earned a bachelor of science degree. He is married and
has two grown children from a prior marriage. Those children do not live with Applicant.
Applicant lives within his means. The only debts at issue are the delinquent debts noted
in the SOR, none of which were recently acquired.
In 1997, Applicant’s wife moved to another part of the country to further her
career. The separation was hard on the marriage. In 2003, Applicant and his wife of 27
years divorced. Applicant started his own business in 2005, moved to another state in
2007, and relocated to his present home region in 2010. In the interim, from 2005 to
2009, Applicant faced some financial difficulties and had to borrow money from family.1
In 2010, Applicant began working for his current employer. He has enjoyed a stable
career as a contractor and has not suffered any notable periods of unemployment in
over a decade. 
In April 2013, Applicant consulted a bankruptcy attorney regarding the debts at
issue. He decided not to file for bankruptcy because he did not feel he was liable for
them and because most of them were poised for deletion from his credit report due to
their age.  In June 2013, he enlisted the aid of a law firm to help him dispute the related2
credit report entries and improve his credit. 
At issue in the March 12, 2013, SOR are the following debts:
1.a and 1.f – Collection accounts for $19,326 and $21,951, respectively. Documentary
Evidence Debt May Not Be Applicant’s Responsibility. When Applicant’s former wife
moved to another state in 1997, Applicant gave her a power of attorney to purchase a
residence. She purchased a specified property, acquired two or three additional
properties, then rolled them over under mortgages held by this creditor. This delinquent
account represents one of those properties.  Applicant was not aware that she had3
purchased multiple properties or acquired multiple mortgages until their divorce
proceedings. Pursuant to their divorce decree, Applicant’s former wife is responsible for
 Tr. 31-32.      4
 Tr. 36.      5
 Tr. 38-39.      6
 Tr. 41.      7
 Tr. 42.      8
3
the properties purchased in that state. Consequently, Applicant argues that he has
been relieved of financial responsibility for those properties. His law firm is poised to
dispute these credit report entries on his behalf.    4
1.b – Medical collection account for $890. Unaddressed. Applicant believes that this
balance is related to pre-operative procedures related to a back surgery performed a
little over two years ago. Applicant testified that he has had difficulty contacting this
medical provider. He believes that “with this [law firm] that I have right now, more than
likely, that will get paid, if it is my bill, which I'm certain it probably is.”  There is no5
evidence that it is presently poised for addressing by the law firm.
1.c – Telecommunications collection account for $385.  Unaddressed. When Applicant
moved in 2007, he noted this his telecommunications bill had drastically increased. It
appeared that the company had been double charging him.  He requested the company6
make a credit adjustment, but it refused. No attempts to resolve the issue have been
initiated by Applicant since that time. He is now prepared to have the law firm address
this delinquent account on his behalf. There is no evidence that the firm is presently
poised for addressing by the law firm.
1.d – Collection account for $52. Unaddressed. When Applicant cancelled an insurance
policy in 2009, he requested that a roadside assistance option also be cancelled. When
it was not, this balance accrued. Applicant testified that he then asked that the matter
be resolved. It is still reflected on his credit report. No further action has been taken to
dispute or resolve this account. It is unclear whether Applicant’s law firm will include this
account in its efforts on Applicant’s behalf.7
1.e – Collection account for $542. Unaddressed. When Applicant relocated from one
state in 2007, he thought he had paid his final water bill. A subsequent charge was
reflected, which Applicant brought to the utility’s attention. The matter was never
resolved or further pursued. It is unclear whether Applicant’s law firm will include this
account in its efforts on Applicant’s behalf.8
1.g – Collection account for $9,300. Unaddressed. This credit card was opened in the
1980s and used in 2001 to help pay for some of Applicant’s son’s expenses related to a
rehabilitation program. Applicant testified that he paid off the card in 2004, when he was
refinancing his home mortgage. He stated that a few months later, he was surprised to
see the card was still open and with a balance of nearly $10,000. He did not believe he
 Tr. 35.      9
 Tr. 34-35.      10
 Tr. 35.      11
 Tr. 35-36.      12
 Tr. 51.      13
 Tr. 59. (“You've just started with [the law firm].  You've had one month, I guess, with them.” “Yes.” “So      14
obviously, nothing really has happened yet.” “Yes.” “ And you predict that this will be -- that they will be done
with their process within about six months to a year.” “Yes, Sir.”)
 Tr. 50.      15
 Tr. 45. This reflects a recent reduction of about 8% caused by the current sequestration and roll-backs      16
in government contracts, Previously, Applicant took home about $2,900 every two weeks.
4
owed the sum for the charges noted: “They did not want to work with me what so ever,
on this, whatever, and I had told them, you know, I paid it off. I closed the account, so,
what is going on here, and so, even talking to supervisors, they wouldn't do anything
with that. . . . I just said, ‘Okay, now, it's your's.’"   He let the account go into delinquent9
status due to the creditor’s refusal to work with him.  He never disputed this account10
with any of the major credit reporting bureaus because he “really never had a need for
credit.”  To date, the balance first noted in 2004 has not been disputed. He is now11
prepared to have his law firm dispute the account during their process of correcting and
repairing his credit report.  There is no evidence that it is presently poised for12
addressing by the law firm.
Applicant submitted a copy of his agreement with the law firm (Ex. A) at the June
13, 2013, hearing. He stated that the law firm’s time frame for addressing the cited
debts is from six months to a year.  The agreement is comprised of multiple parts. It is13
electronically signed and dated (June 3, 2013) on the line for acknowledgment that he
had an opportunity to review a copy of the disclosure statement. It is similarly signed at
the end of the package regarding an information statement required by law and
information regarding cancellation of the agreement. It is not, however, signed on page
6 on the pivotal line reserved for “Signature. I have received and had the opportunity to
review the [law firm] Engagement Agreement and Limited Designation of agency, which
I understand is a binding contract, and agree to all its terms.” The document does not
have a list of the creditors or accounts to be addressed by the firm on Applicant’s
behalf. Applicant admits that the law firm agreement is sufficiently recent that no
progress has yet been made.  He stated that he recently made the first monthly14
payment of $99 on the plan, but did not provide evidence that payment was transacted.
Applicant has no debts of note other than those set forth in the SOR. He does
not have any active credit cards.  He takes home approximately $5,400 every four15
weeks.  After monthly expenses and a recent $400 reduction in housing expenses,16
Applicant retains approximately $2,900 a month. Other recent savings may increase
 Tr. 45-48. Recent reductions raise Applicant’s net income to about what it was before the recent 8%      17
salary decrease.
 Besides his brother, Applicant also lost his mother, and his wife lost her father and two aunts in the past      18
couple of years.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      19
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      20
5
this sum by $100 to $200.  A new and additional expenditure is a monthly payment to17
Applicant’s law firm of $99. Payment on this arrangement started about a week or two
before the June 2013 hearing. To date, one payment on the plan has been made.
Applicant’s net monthly savings go either into a savings account or toward investments
in precious metal (silver). In the past year, he started providing his daughter and her
family with about $500 to $600 a month in financial support. Since January 2013, he
has helped provide financial assistance to his late brother’s children, thus far amounting
to about $4,500.18
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a19
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  20
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
 Id.      21
 Id.      22
 AG ¶ 18.      23
6
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 states that decisions shall be “in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified/sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard indicates
that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21
Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.22
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is  the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.23
Here, the Government introduced evidence indicating Applicant has significant
delinquent debt he has failed to satisfy. This fact is sufficient to raise Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns. 
The individual debts at issue were acquired between 1997 and 2009. Applicant
disputes and disavows responsibility for all the debts except for the one cited in SOR
allegation 1.b ($890), which he concedes may be legitimately owed. He provided
documentary evidence from his divorce indicating that he was relieved of the
obligations noted in SOR allegations 1.a and 1.f. ($19,326 and $21,951). This
represents the majority of the debt at issue. However, there is no similar documentary
evidence offered that shows he is not responsible for the debts at SOR 1.c ($385), 1.d
7
($52), 1.e ($542), and 1.g ($9,300), which account for over $10,000 in delinquent debt.
Nor is there documented evidence that he has persisted in attempts to dispute the
accounts with one of the leading credit reporting bureaus or seek corrective action by
the designated creditors. Therefore, Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition AG ¶
20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate
the basis for the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue) only
applies to SOR allegations 1.a and 1.f. 
With the exception of the debts noted at SOR allegations 1.a and 1.f, the
remaining debts appear to be the result of oversight by Applicant or error by his
creditors. For the most part, Applicant argued that he tried to rectify these errors by
disputing these accounts as they came to his attention. Although he provided no
documentary evidence of such attempts, Applicant was credible in his testimony.
However, more than a single token gesture is needed to show that an earnest and
diligent attempt has been made to address, dispute, or validate a questionable account.
This is particularly true for debts which continue on one’s credit reports for multiple
years. For example, Applicant testified that in about 2004, he contacted the creditor for
the credit card debt noted at SOR allegation 1.g for $9,300, yet there is no indication he
followed up on his dispute of this substantial balance. Applicant has held a security
clearance for a number of years. He should be aware that finances do pose an issue.
Consequently, to simply dispute a debt once, using only one method (direct dispute with
the creditor), and then ignore it until it poses a security concern, reflects questionable
judgment and poor reliability. AG § 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply.
Applicant enlisted the assistance of a law firm to help him contest disputed
accounts and correct his credit report. Unfortunately, he waited until only a week or two
before the hearing to make an agreement to have that firm act on his behalf. Therefore,
the behavior at issue is recent. Moreover, Applicant has a demonstrated pattern of
simply neglecting accounts that are not successfully disputed on the first attempt, and
he concedes he has not utilized the accepted process of disputing a debt through one
of the major credit reporting bureaus. Furthermore, although he testified that, to date,
he has paid for the first month of the law firm’s services, he failed to provide evidence
that such payment was made. The lack of a proven and established record of timely
payments on a plan that is expected to last for six months to a year is troublesome. Of
more concern is the fact that all facets of the engagement agreement are not signed,
which, in tandem with the lack of proof that the first month’s payment to the firm was
transacted, raises questions as to whether a good-faith effort to address the debts at
issue has yet been initiated. In addition, there is no indication in the agreement as to
what debts are covered by the agreement for the firm to address. Of equal concern is
the fact that the law firm has yet to commence action or make any progress on the
debts at issue, and the fact there is no evidence Applicant has received formal financial
counseling. Therefore, neither AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
8
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
and AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) nor AG
¶ 20(d) (the individual indicated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts) apply.
 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. In addition, what constitutes reasonable behavor in such cases,
as contemplated by FC MC ¶ 20(b), depends on the specific facts in a given case. 
I considered the specific facts and circumstances in this case. Applicant is a
mature and direct man who has honorably served this country both in the military and in
the private sector. He has maintained a security clearance since he was 18 without
incident. He is educated, has raised two children, is currently settled with his wife, and
is living within his means. 
Applicant disputes all but one of the debts at issue. He only provided evidence
indicating that the debts at SOR allegations 1.a and 1.f have a documented basis for
reasonable dispute. Moreover, having decided to forego bankruptcy protection with
regard to the debts at issue, citing to the fact that he denies the debts cited are his and
because those debts will soon be removed from his credit reports due to their age,
Applicant recently enlisted the assistance of a credit counselor. Through that service,
he hopes to successfully challenge the debts at issue. Their agreement, however, is
unclear: The agreement does not seem to be fully executed; there is no evidence that
the first monthly payment of $99 was transacted; and Applicant concedes that the firm
has yet to make any progress toward addressing his disputed accounts. Even if
evidence had been introduced showing the law firm had made some form of initial
progress on the debts, there is no established track record showing that Applicant is
fully committed to a properly executed plan that could continue for up to a year. 
This process does not demand that every debt at issue be addressed. It does,
however, require that there be evidence of a workable plan to address the debts at
issue, and documented evidence that the plan has been successfully implemented.
Here, evidence of an incomplete agreement with a law firm acting as a credit repair
service on unspecified accounts, and one month’s worth of paid services on that plan,
do not meet that standard. Therefore, it is premature to conclude that Applicant’s recent
enlistment of a law firm meets the standards demanded by this process. Consequently,
financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. Clearance is denied. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
