 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13809 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists seven delinquent or charged-off 
debts totaling $11,935. Delinquent federal income taxes account for $9,321 of this total. 
His tax debt and three other SOR debts are paid, reducing his unresolved delinquent 
debt total to less than $1,000. Financial concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2011, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (GE 1) On February 6, 2013, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for a determination on whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
On March 13, 2013, DOHA received Applicant’s undated response to the SOR. 
(HE 3) On April 26, 2013, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on 
Applicant’s case. On May 2, 2013, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On May 21, 
2013, Applicant agreed by email with his hearing date of June 10, 2013. On May 24, 
2013, DOHA issued a formal notice of hearing and scheduled his hearing for June 10, 
2013. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled, using video teleconference. 
Department Counsel offered four exhibits, and Applicant offered one exhibit. (GE 1-4; 
AE A) (Tr. 20-22) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-4 and AE A. (Tr. 20-
22) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s response to the 
SOR. (HE 1-3) On June 19, 2013, I received the transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted responsibility for the debts in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 
1.g, and he denied the remaining SOR allegations. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 5; GE 1) He 
worked as a full-time firefighter until April 2013, when he lost this position and went to 
part-time employment because his security clearance was not approved. (Tr. 38-40) His 
annual salary before moving to part-time status was $57,500. (Tr. 40) He has two part-
time jobs. (Tr. 41) Because of the loss of his full-time employment as a firefighter, he 
currently has a negative monthly income. (Tr. 42) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 2000, and he expects to receive a 
bachelor’s degree in 2013 with a major in business administration. (Tr. 7) He is a 
certified paramedic. (Tr. 7) He married in 2000, and he was divorced in 2011. (Tr. 6) His 
children from his first marriage are 6, 10, and 12 years old. (Tr. 6) He married his 
current spouse in 2012. He has not held a security clearance. (Tr. 10)   
 
Applicant joined the Army in 2001, and he served for three years in an air assault 
division as an infantry soldier. (Tr. 8-9) He deployed to Iraq from March 8, 2003 to 
February 1, 2004, and from May 2, 2008 to February 14, 2009. (Tr. 8; GE 4 at I24-I25) 
He is currently a sergeant (E-5) in his Army Reserve unit, and his military occupational 
specialty (MOS) is combat medic. (Tr. 8) He received two Army Commendation Medals; 
however, none of them were with “V Device.” (Tr. 9)   
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Financial Considerations 
 
In 2009, Applicant separated from his spouse. (Tr. 23) In April 2010, he 
discovered several thousand dollars in unpaid debts that his wife had hidden from him. 
(Tr. 23, 25) He has worked diligently to repair his finances over the last three years.   
 
Applicant’s SOR lists seven delinquent or charged-off debts totaling $11,935. His 
delinquent federal income taxes constitute $9,321 of the $11,935 total. His delinquent 
debts are discussed in his SF 86, credit reports, Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), responses to DOHA interrogatories, SOR 
response, and at his hearing. His seven SOR debts are described as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a medical collection debt for $38. Applicant diligently sought, but 
was unable to locate the creditor and account information. (Tr. 24, 27-28) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a medical debt for $130. Applicant said the office for the creditor 
was closed. (Tr. 24, 31) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a collection debt for $628. He did not provide any evidence showing 
resolution of this debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is a collection debt for $284. On May 23, 2013, Applicant paid this 
debt. (Tr. 22; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a collection debt for $651. Applicant said he paid this debt; 
however, there is no documentation proving the debt is resolved. (Tr. 29) He is credited 
with resolving this debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a collection debt for $883. Applicant’s credit report showed the debt 
was paid. (GE 3 at 1) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g is a debt owed to the IRS for $9,321. In 2009, Applicant’s spouse 
under reported their income to the IRS, and Applicant was unaware of what she had 
done until their divorce was initiated. (Tr. 24) He made several payments to the IRS 
under a payment plan; the IRS withheld his spouse’s $3,800 tax refund, reducing the 
debt to $6,600; and the IRS advised Applicant that his tax refund was being withheld. 
(Tr. 25, 33-35) His tax refund is scheduled to be $9,523, which will completely resolve 
his delinquent tax debt. (AE B) He should still receive a refund of several thousand 
dollars from the IRS. 
 
Applicant provided proof that he paid several delinquent debts. (GE 4) They may 
have been the same debts as alleged in the SOR because sometimes paid debts are 
erroneously transferred to new collection companies. He paid his state income taxes, 
except for $369. (Tr. 37) He intends to pay his remaining state income tax debt, using 
his federal income tax refund. (Tr. 37) Applicant did not present any evidence that he 
received financial counseling.   
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Adverse 
clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Nothing in this decision 
should be construed to suggest that I based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his SF 
86, credit reports, OPM interview, responses to DOHA interrogatories, SOR response, 
and statement at his hearing.  
 
Some of Applicant’s debts became delinquent when he became estranged from 
his spouse, and she concealed some debts from him. Applicant’s SOR alleges seven 
delinquent or charged-off debts totaling $11,935. His delinquent federal income taxes 
from 2009 constituted $9,321 of this total. AG ¶ 19(g) does not apply because the 
evidence does not establish his 2009 tax return was filed late, or that Applicant knew his 
tax return intentionally understated his income. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
and 20(b). Divorce and his spouse’s misconduct caused Applicant to have debts he 
could not afford to pay for a time. His financial problems were affected by circumstances 
largely beyond his control. He and his former spouse paid their delinquent federal 
income taxes. He provided proof that he paid two other debts, reducing the SOR debt 
total to $1,447. I accept his statement that he paid one additional debt as credible, 
further reducing the delinquent SOR debt total to $819. I am satisfied that if any 
creditors contact him seeking payment, he will act in good faith to timely resolve the 
debt.  
 
 Application of AG ¶ 20(c) is not warranted. Applicant did not describe receipt of 
financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable. Applicant admitted responsibility 
for and took reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his SOR debts, establishing 
some good faith.2 AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to any debts because he did not provide 
documentary proof that he disputed any debts.      
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In sum, Applicant fell behind on his debts primarily because of his former 
spouse’s failure to pay their debts and her misrepresentation of their income on their 
2009 federal income tax return. He and his former spouse paid their delinquent tax debt, 
and he paid three other SOR debts. Once Applicant returns to full-time employment, he 
will be able to maintain his financial responsibility. It is unlikely that financial problems 
will recur. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline F are incorporated into my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s credit reports and SOR allege seven delinquent or charged-off 
debts totaling $11,935. His delinquent federal income taxes from 2009 constituted 
$9,321 of this total.  
 
The evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial 
than the evidence supporting denial. Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense 
contractor, who has been working as a firefighter and paramedic. There is no evidence 
at his current employment of any disciplinary problems. He served in the active Army 
and the Army Reserve from 2001 to present. He served in Iraq for more than a year 
(two tours). He has never held a security clearance. There is no evidence of disloyalty 
                                                                                                                                            
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or that he would intentionally violate national security.  He has not had any alcohol-
related problems. He and his former spouse paid their delinquent federal income tax 
debt. He paid three other SOR debts. He has less than $1,000 of unresolved delinquent 
debt. His track record of delinquent debt resolution shows Appellant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude approval of Applicant’s 
access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to approve Applicant’s security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is approved. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
