 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10834 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 1, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. This action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 4, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on April 25, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 9, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on May 16, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 that were admitted into evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A that was admitted 
into evidence without objection. The record was left open until May 30, 2013, to provide 
Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. He timely submitted documents 
that were marked as AE B through D and admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 4, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old computer drafter who works for a defense contractor. 
He has been working for his current employer since December 2012. He graduated 
from high school in 2000 and earned an associate’s degree in computer-aided drafting 
and design in 2003. He is divorced and has one child who is four years old. Since about 
2005, he has held a security clearance without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had six delinquent debts totaling $272,029. 
These debts include a consumer debt of $35 (SOR ¶ 1.a), three student loans totaling 
$19,127 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b–1.d), and two mortgage loans totaling $252,887 (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 
1.f). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the small consumer debt claiming it 
was paid and admitted the other allegations. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce. He and his ex-wife 
married in June 2006 and divorced in August 2010. While married, they lived in a city 
that was hit hard by the recent recession. In November 2006, they purchased a home 
for about $256,000 in that city. They paid about $2,000 on the home at its closing and 
financed the remaining amount through two mortgage loans from the same lender. At 
the time of the purchase, he and his ex-wife were employed and contributed to the 
mortgage loan payments. Their monthly mortgage payments were about $2,000. 
Applicant believes that his ex-wife applied for a mortgage loan modification that was 
denied. They paid their monthly mortgage loan payments from November 2006 to 
March 2009. When they separated, his ex-wife stopped contributing to the payments 
and he could not afford to make them by himself. He was awarded the home in their 
divorce. The home was foreclosed in May 2011. At some point after the foreclosure, he 
and his ex-wife received a $3,000 check from the mortgage lender. In December 2012, 
he moved to another state.3 
 
 In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided two Form 1099-A (Acquisition 
or Abandonment of Secured Property) documents dated May 24, 2011, for the 
mortgage loans. The Form 1099-A for the primary mortgage reflected that the balance 
of the outstanding principal was $199,059 and the fair market value of the property was 
$216,533. His most recent credit report indicated the primary mortgage loan had a zero 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 16-17; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2-4, 6.  
 
3 Tr. at 16-18, 25-26, 32-44; GE 1-4.  
 
 
3 
 
balance. The Form 1099-A for the second mortgage loan reflected that the balance of 
the outstanding principal was $50,160 and the fair market value of the property was 
$77,000. His most recent credit report indicated the second mortgage loan had been 
charged off and had a past-due balance of “$52,887 as of May 2011.”4 
 
 The state where Applicant’s home was located is a deficiency state. As part of 
the foreclosure, an appraisal of the property is obtained on the date of acquisition or 
foreclosure sale. The state allows the lender to sue the debtor after foreclosure for the 
amount that was owed minus the greater of the amount for which the house was either 
sold or appraised. The deficiency lawsuit must be filed within six months after the 
foreclosure sale. Here, Applicant’s credit reports dated September 8, 2012, and May 10, 
2013, do not reflect that any judgments have been entered against him.5 
 
 Applicant has multiple student loans. The SOR alleged that three of them were 
past due between 90 and 120 days in 2012. However, his most recent credit report 
reflected that each student loan has been reported as being current since December 
2012. He testified that his student loans were either being paid or were in forbearance. 
He indicated that he would start making payments on those that were in forbearance at 
the end of May 2013.6 
 
 Applicant testified that he paid the small consumer debt of $35. In his response 
to interrogatories, he indicated that this debt was paid in full in November 2012 and 
provided a confirmation number. This debt is no longer reflected in his most recent 
credit report.7 
 
  Applicant has not received any financial counseling. He is meeting his current 
financial obligations. He pays $500 per month for child support and has never fallen 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 48-50; AE A-D. It is not clear why the 1099-A documents for that property, which were 
both issued on the same day, reflect two different amounts for the fair market value of the property.  
 
5 GE 3; AE A. See Nevada Revised Statutes (NRS) § 40.451 et seq. This statute is contained in 
Hearing Exhibit 1. See also NRS § 40.455.3 that states: 
 
3. If the judgment creditor or the beneficiary of the deed of trust is a financial institution, 
the court may not award a deficiency judgment to the judgment creditor or the beneficiary 
of the deed of trust, even if there is a deficiency of the proceeds of the sale and a balance 
remaining due the judgment creditor or beneficiary of the deed of trust, if: 
      (a) The real property is a single-family dwelling and the debtor or grantor was the 
owner of the real property at the time of the foreclosure sale or trustee’s sale; 
      (b) The debtor or grantor used the amount for which the real property was secured 
by the mortgage or deed of trust to purchase the real property; 
      (c) The debtor or grantor continuously occupied the real property as the debtor’s or 
grantor’s principal residence after securing the mortgage or deed of trust; and 
      (d) The debtor or grantor did not refinance the mortgage or deed of trust after 
securing it. 
 
6 Tr. at 25, 28-32, 45-46, 48; GE 3; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 27-28, 50-51; GE 3; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
behind on his child support payments. In a personal financial statement submitted in 
November 2012, he indicated that his annual salary was $47,000 and that he had a net 
monthly remainder of $500. At the hearing, he testified that his annual salary has 
increased to $52,000. His most recent credit report listed that he had 35 opened or 
closed financial accounts that were in good standing.8 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 44-50; GE 2.  
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are attributable to his separation and divorce. 
Those were conditions beyond his control. Since December 2012, he has taken action 
to bring his student loans into good standing. Appellant’s home was foreclosed in May 
2011. He received two 1099-A Forms that each reflected the fair market value of the 
home was greater than the outstanding principal owed. His most recent credit report 
reflected that the primary mortgage loan had a zero balance and his second mortgage 
loan had a balance of “$52,887 as of May 2011.” From his most recent credit report, it 
appears that the mortgage lender did not pursue deficiency judgments within the six-
month statutory period and those loans are no longer enforceable. Nevertheless, “[e]ven 
if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable under state law, the federal government is 
entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in 
incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”9 Applicant’s default on the 
mortgage loans happened under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Other than the 
mortgage loans, he was current on his remaining financial obligations. He is living within 
his means and his financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20 (b), and 20(c) 
apply. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature adult and responsible father. I found him to be a forthright 
and credible witness. He experienced financial problems following a separation and 
divorce and has taken reasonable steps to resolve those problems. He is currently living 
within his means. His financial problems are not likely to recur. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
   
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
