 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-12916 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 10, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On January 30, 2013, the Department of 
Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 26, 2013. Applicant denied 
four allegations and admitted the five remaining allegations. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On March 25, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant on March 26, 2013. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on April 9, 
2013. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that 
would have expired on May 9, 2013. His Response is dated May 4, 2013. The 
Department Counsel had no objection to the inclusion of the Response in the case file. I 
received the case assignment on May 28, 2013. Based upon a review of the complete 
case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.e, and 1.h. He 
admitted the other five allegations. (Items 1, 3) 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He has been married twice and has one stepchild. He 
works for a defense contractor as an electronics technician. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant’s Answer and Response state the delinquent debts in the SOR are old 
and therefore infrequent. One debt is dated in 2001. Applicant filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 1996 (Subparagraph 1.i). He received his discharge in May 1996. 
Applicant admits this bankruptcy. All the alleged debts occurred after his discharge. 
Applicant claims he lives within his financial income at the current time. Delinquent debt 
was caused by his present wife and him earning overtime pay, spending that money, 
and then overtime at his company decreased substantially. They could not pay the 
debts they had incurred without their overtime increased income. (Item 3, Response) 
 
Applicant’s Response states in May 2011 his total debt was $89,482 with $4,012 
of delinquent debt. In November 2012 Applicant claims his total debt was $90,212 with 
only $942 of delinquent debt. He asserts this debt was resolved but he does not explain 
how it was “rectified.” Next, Applicant states his only remaining items that need to be 
“brought current” are the three medical debts for $1015 listed in Subparagraphs 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.f. The SOR lists eight delinquent debts totaling $37,208. (Items 5-12; 
Response) 
 
Applicant owes $611 for a medical debt (Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant admits 
this debt. He states the debt was overlooked and not paid. He claims he will pay it “in 
the near future.” Applicant did not provide proof of any payment of this debt. It is 
unresolved. (Items 5-12) 
 
Applicant owes $70 for another medical debt (Subparagraph 1.b). This debt 
results from a medical procedure Applicant had, but which he did not payfor the medical 
charge. He claims the debt was overlooked but he admits he owes it. Applicant asserts 
this debt will be paid “in the near future.” This debt is unresolved. (Items 5-12) 
 
Applicant owes $1,357 on a credit card debt that was charged off by the creditor 
and sold to a collector according to the two latest credit reports in the File 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
(Subparagraph 1.c). Applicant denies this debt. Applicant’s Answer states only $800 
was charged off and the debt originated 12 years ago. His Response shows the debt in 
a charged off status and that the credit limit on the card was $800. The remaining $557 
is interest and penalties. Applicant claims to have an open credit card account with this 
company. He also asserts this debt is the same as that listed in Subparagraph 1.h. 
However, the name of the collector is not the same as that listed in Subparagraph 1.h. 
This debt is unresolved. (Items 5-12; Answer, Response) 
 
Applicant owed $15,313 to a bank for a loan (Subparagraph 1.d). Applicant 
denied this debt. Applicant claims in his Answer the actual debt is $3,300 and the debt 
was settled for less than the full amount. The credit report document Applicant 
submitted with his Answer shows the credit limit was $3,300 and that the debt was paid 
for less than the full balance and is paid in full. No date of payment is shown on that 
document. He does not state the settlement amount to which he refers. He asserts he 
requested an update of his credit record to show the debt is resolved. The document 
from the “freecreditreport.com” website shows the debt is resolved. (Items 3, 5-12; 
Answer, Response) 
 
Applicant owed an automobile lender $16,930 for a car purchase (Subparagraph 
1.e). As of the date of the SOR on January 30, 2013, the debt was alleged to be unpaid. 
The credit report in the File dated May 20, 2011, shows the balance owed as $4,925. 
The November 2012 credit report does not list this debt. Applicant denies this debt. 
Applicant claims two credit reports show the debt was paid, but Applicant did not submit 
proof of such payment. He claims the car dealership paid the debt when he traded this 
vehicle into it for another car. Applicant also submitted a document with his Answer 
showing the debt is “paid and closed.” The account on that document was closed in 
May 2011. This debt is resolved. (Items 3, 5-12; Answer, Response) 
 
Applicant owes a medical services provider $334 (Subparagraph 1.f). He admits 
this debt. He claims this is another debt that he overlooked after he went into a hospital 
for treatment a few years ago. This debt is unresolved. (Items 5-12; Answer, Response) 
 
Applicant owes a bank $548 on a charged-off account (Subparagraph 1.g). He 
admits this debt. He claims his wife incurred this debt six years ago and it will be taken 
off his credit record because it is only there as a consequence of his home state being a 
community property state. He submitted a document dated November 27, 2012, 
showing this amount is owed to a collector and a suggested repayment plan. He circled 
the installment payment plan starting at $20 as a down payment and $44.04 to be paid 
in each of the succeeding 12 months. But Applicant did not submit proof of any 
payments on this plan. This debt is unresolved. (Items 5-12; Answer, Response) 
 
Applicant owes a collector $2,045 on a credit-card debt (Subparagraph 1.h). He 
denies this debt. Applicant states he tried to contact the collector but could not obtain a 
current telephone number. He also claims this debt is in error and he wrote to two 
credit-reporting agencies to request removal of this debt from his credit reports. He did 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
not submit copies of any letters to prove his assertion. This debt is unresolved. (Items 5-
12; Answer, Response) 
 
In December 2012 Applicant wrote letters to eight creditors listed in the SOR. His 
May 2013 Response does not include or make reference to any replies from those 
creditors. The letters do not contain the amount of the delinquent debt, only to account 
numbers on five letters. Only two of the remaining five letters have account numbers 
which are listed in the May 2011 credit report. (Items 6, 8) 
 
Applicant’s November 2012 credit report shows about $54,000 in student loans 
that are deferred. At some time in the future Applicant will have to repay these loans. 
They are an additional financial obligation not listed in the SOR that will affect 
Applicant’s ability to repay his delinquent debts. (Item 7) 
 
Applicant had an investigative interview in May 2011. These delinquent debts 
were discussed with him. He took little action to resolve six of them after that date. His 
December 19, 2012 personal financial statement shows a net monthly remainder 
income of $1,485. Applicant does not show payments on the statement to more than 
two creditors. He does not discuss in his Answer or Response any comprehensive plan 
to repay his delinquent debts or establish a savings plan from which he could repay 
these obligations. (Items 8, 9, Answer; Response) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, three conditions are applicable to the 
facts found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and /or other financial analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 From 2001 to the present, Applicant accumulated eight delinquent debts 
identified on the SOR, totaling $37,208. Six debts remain unpaid or unresolved that 
equal $4,965. However, Applicant’s Response in May 2013 admits to $90,212 of debt, 
though he does not state whether it is delinquent or being paid timely. Applicant also 
admits he filed and was discharged in bankruptcy in 1996. The debts listed in the SOR 
accumulated after his Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  
 
 It is clear Applicant cannot pay his delinquent debts in a timely manner. He has a 
history from 1996 of being unable to pay his debts. And, he consistently spends money 
beyond his ability to repay it, shown by his admission in his Response that his current 
debt load in November 2012 is $90,212, an increase of over $800 from the May 2011 
amount he stated in his Response. These three disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant has not shown a plan to repay the six debts within a 
reasonable time. He did not discuss any savings program, from which he could 
withdraw money to pay these debts or keep his future financial obligations from 
becoming delinquent in the same manner his current accounts are. Applicant has 
already filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy once, demonstrating that his spending got out of his 
control in a significant manner. He has not discussed in his Answer or Response how 
he would avoid such a predicament in the future.   
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No mitigating condition applies. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 The SOR listed six delinquent debts, which continue to be unpaid, so they are 
currently outstanding. Applicant’s contrary argument is not persuasive. His continued 
practice of spending money he cannot repay in a reasonable period of time shows poor 
judgment. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. In the past 11 years, Applicant 
has been employed continuously. He also failed to show he acted responsibly since his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1996 regarding his financial conditions. He settled the two 
largest debts but does not explain how he did it with his available funds. Applicant 
incurred all the debts in the SOR after his bankruptcy. He failed to meet his burden of 
proof on that issue, so the mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not present any evidence of financial counseling. Nor did he show 
his accumulation of debt has ceased to be a problem. AG ¶ 20 (c) is not applicable. 
 
Applicant has not initiated a good-faith effort, shown by clearly stated 
documentation that he repaid six of his creditors. In fact, the information he presented is 
not directed to meet his burden of proof. He does not address each allegation in a 
specific manner to show the debts were paid or are being paid by relevant 
documentations. AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not submit any documents disputing these eight debts, or 
containing a basis for such disputes. AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence or information concerning any relevant affluence acquired 
by Applicant. AG ¶ 20 (f) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken sufficient and consistent action to resolve his 
delinquent debts. This inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
or duress based on the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action 
continues to this day, and is obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his 
past performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. 
Next, he exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to resolve his 
delinquent debts during the past seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                  
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
