1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-11782
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
                                                     For Applicant: Pro se                                                     
                      
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On February 22, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to the above-
referenced Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR). The SOR enumerated security
concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). DOD took action under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.   
In an undated response, Applicant submitted a response in which she denied the
two allegations raised and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on April 24,
2013. The parties agreed to a hearing date of May 23, 2013, and a notice setting the
hearing for that date was issued on May 1, 2013. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony and offered
two documents, which were accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.)
A-B. She was given until May 6, 2013, to submit any additional documents. On request,
that deadline was later extended to May 12, 2013. The Government offered five
documents, which were accepted into the record as Exs. 1-5. On June 21, 2013, the
 Tr. 18-19.      1
 Tr. 19. (“ . . . it was valued at like 3-something”).      2
 Tr. 20.      3
 Tr. 21.      4
 Tr. 22.      5
 Tr. 23. Applicant believes the payments were deducted from her checking account.      6
2
Government forwarded five documents, which were timely received from Applicant and
included in the record as Exs. C–G. The record was then closed. Based on a review of
the testimony, official case file, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet her burden
of mitigating security concerns related to financial considerations. Clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old assistant program manager who has worked in that
capacity for the same defense contractor for the last three years. She has earned a
bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering and a master’s degree in technical
management. She is separated and has one minor child.
In the summer of 2005, Applicant and her sister purchased a house worth
approximately $450,000 without a down payment. They assumed ownership in 50-50%
shares. The entire purchase was financed with a primary and secondary mortgage
administered by the same lender.  Their joint ownership was reflected on the title and1
the mortgages. In 2008, Applicant’s sister got married. The sister then followed her new
husband to another metropolitan area, where they bought a new home. Before the
sister moved, the two women decided to try to sell the property, rather than let it go into
foreclosure. By then, the market value of the house had depreciated into the
$300,000s.  They approached their mortgagor, who gave the sisters the option of2
selling the house through a short sale. Applicant understood that “in a short sale, since
the house was appraised for less [than its original purchase price], we could sell it for
less than they agreed . . . .”  The short sale closed in 2008. After about four years of3
mortgage payments and the eventual short sale, the balances on the two mortgages
were approximately $17,655 and $83,726, as noted in the SOR at allegations ¶¶ 1.a-
1.b.
Applicant and her sister were given the impression that they would be liable for
any deficiencies remaining on the mortgages after the short sale.  With her sister now4
relocated and no longer active with the home, Applicant began making payments on the
deficiency.  Applicant does not recall the full amount of the payments she made, or for
how many months she made such payments.  She does not have documentation5
reflecting those payments.  After an unspecified amount of time, however, Applicant6
testified that a realtor told her that a law had been passed “that said . . . if you did a
short sale from 2007 to . . . 2012, you were not allowed to pay that mortgage any more,
 Tr. 23. Applicant is unsure as to what year she was informed by her realtor of this purported change in the      7
law. Tr. 24. Applicant identified the law as the Mortgage Forgiveness Debt Relief Act of 2007. This law was
not mentioned in Applicant’s security clearance application or in interrogatory responses, but was first noted
by Applicant in her 2013 response to the SOR. Tr. 25. Applicant’s generalized interpretation of the law is
inaccurate. 
 Tr. 33; Ex. 3 (Interrogatories, Interview of Nov. 3, 2012, pg. 1).      8
 Tr. 29. The mortgagor’s response to Applicant’s requests have generally emphasized that her account      9
balances were previously charged-off, as noted in her credit reports and in the SOR. The payments Applicant
had made were transacted both before and after the debts had been turned over for collection. Tr. 30-31.
 Tr. 28-29.      10
 Tr. 35.      11
3
or the difference any more . . . .”  Based on her realtor’s word alone, Applicant ceased7
making payments on the discrepancy left after the short sale. Applicant offered no
documents from this realtor regarding this change in the law, nor does she offer any
documents related to the short sale. The conversation with the realtor apparently
occurred after November 2010, when Applicant told investigators that she was trying to
work out a repayment plan with her mortgagor regarding the debt balance owed.8
Consequently, a dozen or more monthly mortgage discrepancy payments were more
than likely made. She has had no success obtaining any documents regarding the short
sale or the discrepancy on the loans from her mortgagor.  There is no evidence these9
payments were refunded to her as being improperly made. Applicant did not provide a
copy of an IRS Form 982, which is commonly used to report a forgiven debt, or either
an IRS Form 1099-A or 1099-C.  She did submit a state certificate of satisfaction10
regarding Applicant’s mortgage. It does not, however, explicitly release her from liability
on her mortgage, and Applicant provided no narrative information regarding its
applicability to the question of her liability.
In 2012, Applicant bought another home with funds secured from a different
mortgagor.  The home price was about $425,000.  Applicant is unsure how much11
money she put down toward the purchase, if anything. She maintains a 401k retirement
account (approximately $70,000), a savings account (about $2,000), and a savings
account linked with her stock market investments (approximately $2,000). She is
presently maintaining custody of her minor child. She and her estranged husband are
presently filing for divorce. Applicant has been frustrated in her attempts to obtain
paperwork from her former mortgagor. Her realtor has been of little help because her
paperwork is in storage and he has yet to find the necessary documents. Applicant’s
sister has no documentation regarding the property. Notice is taken that the state in
question does not have an anti-deficiency statute.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      12
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      13
 Id.      14
 Id.      15
4
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a12
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  13
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 states that decisions shall be “in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified/sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard indicates
that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”14
Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.15
 AG ¶ 18.      16
 Id.      17
5
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  It16
also states that an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  The Government’s evidence indicates that17
Applicant owes approximately $100,000 in charged-off, delinquent debt related to a
mortgaged home after short-sale. This is sufficient to raise Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG
¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). With such conditions raised, it is
left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant and her sister bought their home with no money down, committing
themselves to their mortgage in equal parts. Apparently without objection, Applicant’s
sister simply walked away from her share of responsibilities when she decided to wed,
move, and buy another house. In turn, rather than put the property up for regular sale
and see if could attract a buyer, find a roommate, renegotiate with the mortgagor, or
seek some other recourse that might fully honor her obligation to the lender, Applicant
directly moved to dispose of the property, which was declining in value, through short
sale. She understood the meaning and repercussions of a short sale. After the home
was so conveyed, she made payments toward the deficiency caused by the short sale
of the property on the mortgage balances. 
Applicant only ceased to make those payments when a realtor – not a
mortgagor, bank, lawyer, financial counselor, or tax professional – incorrectly told her
that a new law absolved her of satisfying any balance connected to her mortgage.
There is no evidence she sought to confirm that her situation was covered by the law.
She did not receive a 1099 or other IRS form indicating she was relieved of
responsibility on the mortgage. She did not receive confirmation from her mortgagor
that she was absolved from further payments on the discrepancy. She was not issued a
refund of the money she had paid between the short sale closing and her hearing of a
new law. Apparently, she simply took this favorable news as applicable and correct,
then financed the purchase of her next home soon thereafter. To proceed on the oral
advice of a realtor without affirmation from the mortgagor or confirmation from the IRS
shows dubious judgment and reliability. Neither Financial Consideration Mitigating
Condition AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) nor AG ¶ 20(b)
6
(the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances) apply. 
Resort to a peremptory short sale might be considered a responsible form of
recourse, especially giving the declining value of the property. Here, however, the short
sale appears to have been premature in light of the alternative options that were left
unexplored. AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual indicated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Given the above-cited facts, none
of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.
 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
I considered the specific facts and circumstances in this case. Applicant is a
mature and well-educated woman who, in 2005 while in her mid-20s, bought a home
with her sister. Around  2008, the sister married, moved, and bought a new home.
Realizing she could not afford to make the mortgage payments by herself, and
understanding the value of the house had significantly depreciated, Applicant sought
and received permission from her mortgagor to use a short sale to move the property.
She then started making payments to satisfy the discrepancy between the mortgage
debt and the short sale price. Up to this point, Applicant can be said to have generally
acted responsibly given the circumstances. 
At some unspecified time thereafter, Applicant was given legal advice by a
realtor that she did not need to make any payments to her mortgagor after her short
sale. Applicant assumed the law the realtor cited encompassed her situation. She then
quit making payments to her lender without first checking with her lender, a tax
professional, or someone without an interest in encouraging the purchase of a new
home. Moreover, there is no evidence Applicant ever received an IRS form 1099-C
regarding the discrepancy. Finally, her state is not an anti-deficiency state, and the
state certificate of satisfaction regarding Applicant’s mortgage does not explicitly
release her from liability on her mortgage. 
The burden in these cases is placed squarely on an applicant. Here, the burden
placed on Applicant demands that she provide documentary evidence substantiating
her representations as correct – specifically, evidence that she was absolved of
financial responsibility for the approximately $100,000 discrepancy between her
mortgage balance and the short sale price that were shown by the Government as
7
charged-off. Until sufficient evidence is available showing that this sum was cancelled
or forgiven, or other action is taken, financial considerations security concerns remain
unmitigated. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
