 Authorized in the Directive at E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-12972
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by her unpaid debts. She acted
early and in good faith to resolve her debts, her current finances are sound, and she is
unlikely to experience similar financial problems in the future. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(EQIP) in July 2011. After reviewing the results of a subsequent background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued interrogatories to
Applicant to clarify or augment information obtained by Government investigators.1
Based on the background investigation and on Applicant’s responses to interrogatories,
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
it could not be determined that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information.  On December 10, 2012, DOD2
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security
concerns addressed in the adjudicative guideline  for financial considerations (Guideline3
F).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on April 2, 2013, and I convened a hearing by video
teleconference on May 7, 2013. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits
(Gx.) 1 - 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and proffered two
exhibits, admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B. DOHA
received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on May 17, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed approximately
$47,563 for two delinquent credit card accounts. (SOR 1.a and 1.b) Applicant admitted,
with explanations, both SOR allegations. (Answer) Her admissions are incorporated
herein as facts. Having reviewed the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the
following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 44-year-old technical writer employed by a defense contractor. She
has worked for her current employer since October 2007, but was employed at the
same job site by a different employer from September 2006 until September 2007.
Applicant has an excellent reputation at work for the quality of her work and for her
character and professionalism. She has held a security clearance without incident since
January 2007. (Gx. 1; Ax. A; Tr. 44)
Applicant has a master’s degree in linguistics. From September 2000 until
September 2006, she worked as an adjunct college professor teaching English and
writing. She has been married since January 1998, and she has two children, ages four
and six. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Tr. 47)
While working as a college professor, Applicant’s income varied depending on
how many classes she taught each semester. She estimates her annual income
averaged about $25,000. When she was hired for defense contractor work, she was
pregnant and thought she could work until her October 2006 due date. However, she
had suffered an injury at her previous job and could not immediately start working in
September 2006. She took unpaid leave until January 2007 after her older child was
born. The result was that she did not have any income between for the last four months
of 2006. (Gx. 4; Tr. 54)
3
When Applicant started working in 2007, she worked 32 hours each week and
did not receive the same range of benefits as a full-time employee, such as paid
maternity leave. When her second child was born in October 2008, she was working for
her current employer, but still was not working full time, and did not yet have paid
maternity leave. Between October 2008 and February 2009, she worked part-time from
home while on maternity leave. However, she only made about $300 each month.
Applicant did not become a full-time employee with full paid leave and other benefits
until October 2011. Her average annual salary between January 2007 and October
2011 was about $35,000. Her current full-time salary is about $56,000. (Answer; Gx. 4;
Tr. 55 - 57)
In 2005, Applicant and her husband bought a house for $315,000. Their
mortgage was financed over 30 years at 6.5 percent interest, resulting in a $2,000
monthly payment. Their combined annual income at that time was between $85,000
and $90,000. This increased in January 2007 by about $10,000. However, when
Applicant was not paid for four months in 2006, and was essentially unpaid for five
months when their second child was born, they struggled to pay large obligations, such
as property taxes, unexpectedly high electrical bills in summer, unplanned auto repairs,
and so on. Applicant and her husband amassed three large credit card balances
because they used credit to make ends meet. When they struggled to stay current on
the credit card accounts, the minimum monthly payments doubled. (Answer; Gx. 4; Tr.
40 - 41, 67 - 68, 72 - 73)
Applicant and her husband realized they were in serious financial trouble in 2010.
When she submitted her EQIP in 2011, she disclosed several delinquent debts,
including those alleged in the SOR. Although they were making the minimum monthly
payments on their credit accounts and their mortgage was current, they were unable to
make progress in paying down their credit cards. They tried to no avail to negotiate with
the credit card companies, and they put their house up for sale. However, the credit
card companies would not negotiate as long as money was coming in, and the housing
market where they live was still poor and their home had lost significant value. In late
2010, they sought the advice of her brother-in-law, an attorney. He advised them to stop
paying their credit card accounts and their mortgage. Following his advice, Applicant
and her husband were able to obtain a release from their mortgage through transfer of a
deed in lieu of foreclosure, and they were able to negotiate lower settlement payments
to satisfy two of their three credit card accounts. One of those accounts was the debt
alleged at SOR 1.a. Of the $24,966 due after penalties and interest, they paid $8,738.
These negotiated resolutions resulted in added income tax liabilities for tax years 2011
and 2012, which Applicant and her husband were able to pay on time. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Ax.
B; Tr. 42 - 43, 50, 62 - 66, 69) 
Applicant and her husband are in the process of negotiating a settlement of the
SOR 1.b credit card debt. They have made an initial payment to stop interest from
accruing, and they will likely be able to resolve this debt on terms similar to the SOR 1.a
account. Again, Applicant knows that she and her husband will likely incur an additional
income tax liability as a result of resolving the debt this way. (Answer; Tr. 43, 50 - 53) 
 See Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
4
Applicant and her husband have about $6,800 net income each month. After
expenses, they have about $2,000 remaining, and they have been able to save about
$7,000 and have incurred no new debts since 2010. Applicant understands that her
financial problems were caused, in part, by getting overextended on their expenses.
However, she and her husband both testified that they wanted to resolve their debts in a
reliable, systematic way that would leave their finances more sound than before. (Gx. 4;
Tr. 59 - 60)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
5
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
In addition to Applicant’s admissions, the Government presented sufficient
information to support both of the SOR allegations. Applicant has experienced
significant financial problems since about 2007. One of the debts alleged in the SOR is
still unresolved. These facts raise a security concern that is addressed, in relevant part,
at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
In response, Applicant submitted information that supports application of the
following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
 
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s debts were caused by a combination of lost income and poor money
management decisions. Applicant acknowledges that she and her husband bought too
much house in 2005. Any margin for error was erased when they lost her income in
2006 and 2008. Initial efforts to resolve their debts began long before Applicant
submitted her most recent EQIP, but were hindered by a depressed real estate market.
However, Applicant’s finances are significantly more stable and the circumstances that
gave rise to her financial problems are unlikely to recur. Applicant and her husband
have a positive monthly cash flow, they have one debt left to resolve, and they took a
proactive, systematic approach to resolving their debts. All available information
supports application of AG 20(a) - (d), and Applicant’s finances are no longer a security
concern.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record in the context of the whole-person
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a mature, responsible adult who has a solid
reputation in the workplace. She and her husband have nearly completed their plan to
resolve their unpaid debts and their financial circumstances are now much improved. A
fair and commonsense assessment of the record as a whole shows that Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns raised by the information about her finances.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
