 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13781 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse, highlighted by five alcohol-related 
incidents (one assault and four driving while intoxicated (DWI)). His most recent is a 
felony DWI conviction in 2010. He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He has 
ongoing financial problems, and he is not in control of his financial situation. Clearance 
is revoked. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA) on October 21, 
2010. On December 14, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption), Guideline J (criminal conduct), and Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 19, 2013, and requested a 
decision without a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge on 
February 11, 2013. The case was assigned to me on April 8, 2013. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 25, 2013, 
scheduling a hearing for May 6, 2013.  
 
Applicant participated in his hearing via video teleconference (VTC) from 
Syracuse, New York. Department Counsel, the court reporter, and I were located in 
Arlington, Virginia. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 18. 
Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 3. All exhibits were received 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 14, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant waived his right to 15 days advanced notice of his 
hearing. He had sufficient time to prepare and was ready to proceed. (Tr. 15-16) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations under SOR ¶ 1 (alcohol consumption) and ¶ 2 
(criminal conduct). The criminal conduct allegations are factually the same allegations 
alleged under the alcohol consumption guideline. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
failed to admit or deny any of the Guideline J allegations (SOR ¶ 2). He admitted all 
SOR ¶ 2 allegations at his hearing. Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 3.a, 3.b, and 3.f through 
3.j. He denied SOR ¶¶ 3.c through 3.e. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his testimony and 
demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old test engineer employed with a government contractor. 
He served in the U.S. Army from March 1988 until February 1996. He achieved the rank 
of sergeant (E-5), and his service was characterized as honorable. Applicant testified 
that while in the service he possessed access to classified information at the secret 
level. Applicant married his first wife in June 1989, and they were divorced in April 2000. 
He has three children of this marriage, ages 22, 21, and 18. He attended college and 
earned an associates’ degree in April 2005. 
 
Applicant started working for his current employer, a government contractor, in 
2005. He has held access to classified information at the secret level from 2005 to 
present. There is no evidence to show that he has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. Outside of the security concerns alleged in the 
current SOR, there is no evidence that Applicant had any other security issues of 
concern.  
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant started consuming alcoholic beverages at age 16. From 1990 until 
February 2010, he consumed alcoholic beverages to the point of intoxication about 
twice a month. Between 1993 and February 2010, he has been involved in five alcohol-
related incidents of misconduct. In May 1993, while in the service, he was convicted of 
assault on another service member, and was barred from reenlistment. In December 
1993, he was charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI). In April 1994, he pled guilty 
to driving with ability impaired (DWAI).  
 
In August 1995, Applicant was charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI). In 
October 1995, he pled guilty to driving with ability impaired (DWAI). He was charged 
with DWI in September 2000, and pled guilty to the charge in November 2000. His 
driver’s license was revoked and he was required to attend alcohol counseling. In 
February 2010, he was arrested and charged with aggravated DWI, a felony, and 
harassment in the second degree. He pled guilty to both offenses in November 2010, 
and was placed on an 18-month protection order and on conditional discharge 
(unsupervised probation) for three years. He was required to attend alcohol counseling 
and aftercare treatment. He was diagnosed with alcohol dependence and his prognosis 
was considered guarded. The diagnosis was performed by a certified counselor and 
approved by a physician at a court-ordered substance abuse counseling center.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged his alcohol problem and expressed 
sincere remorse for his past alcohol-related behavior. He understands that he has 
displayed a lack of control and a serious lack of judgment. He is fully aware of the 
concerns raised by his alcohol consumption and indicated that is the reason he did not 
request a hearing. He did not submit a recent diagnosis and prognosis. 
 
Applicant testified that he has not consumed any alcoholic beverages since 
2010. He averred he has been attending Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) at least twice a 
week since his 2010 DWI felony conviction. He has an AA sponsor, and he is a sponsor 
for other AA participants. Applicant stated that he has made lifestyle changes to remain 
sober. He no longer associates with his alcohol-drinking friends and avoids places and 
activities where alcohol is being served.  
 
Regarding the status of his delinquent debts, Applicant has not contacted the 
creditors, he made no payments, and did not dispute any of the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 3.a, 3.b, 3.f, 3.g, and 3.i. He paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 3.c, 3.d, and 3.e. He 
claimed he started making payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 3.h two weeks 
before the hearing. (Tr. 37) He failed to submit any documentary evidence to support 
his claim. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 3.j pertains to Applicant’s mortgage, which is 
currently pending foreclosure. Applicant testified he is meeting with the creditors in the 
near future to try to negotiate a short sale, or a reduced payment arrangement. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are the result of his 2010 DWI conviction. He had 
to pay substantial court fines and lawyer’s fees resulting from his trial and conviction. 
Additionally, he had to pay substantial medical bills for his daughter’s medical treatment. 
He believes that in 2010 alone he paid around $12,500 in hospital bills. He has been 
 
4 
 
 
contacting and paying his creditors one at a time, based on his financial ability. Most of 
Applicant’s SOR allegations are for delinquent credit card accounts. He used his credit 
card accounts to pay for his day-to-day living expenses. Applicant presented no 
evidence to show he has participated in financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the Government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess, from 1990 to February 2010. He 
exercised questionable judgment by consuming alcohol to excess and engaging in 
criminal misconduct on five occasions (assault in 1993, DWAI in 1994 and 1995, DWI in 
2000, and felony DWI in 2010). He was diagnosed with alcohol dependence in 2010. 
His prognosis was considered guarded. 
 
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;” AG ¶ 
22(c): “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent;” and AG ¶ 22(d): “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional . . . of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence,” apply.  
 
  There are four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
 
6 
 
 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  All of the above mitigating conditions partially apply, but do not fully mitigate the 
alcohol considerations concerns. Applicant has been consuming alcoholic beverages 
since age 16. He has a long history of abusing alcohol and exercising poor judgment. 
Between 1993 and 2000, he was involved in four alcohol-related offenses, three of them 
DWIs. Notwithstanding his alcohol counseling and prior convictions, in 2010 he drove 
again while intoxicated and was convicted of a felony DWI.  
 
  Applicant claimed he has been sober and attending after care counseling with AA 
since 2010. During most of this time, he has been on unsupervised probation by the 
court. Because of his long history of alcohol abuse, his 2010 guarded prognosis, and 
the lack of a recent diagnosis and prognosis, I have questions as to Applicant’s ability to 
remain sober. Not enough time has passed for me to conclude that he has overcome 
his alcohol dependence problem. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government’s concern is that criminal activity “creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.” AG ¶ 30.  
 
From 1993 to 2010, Applicant was involved in five alcohol-related offenses - 
assault in 1993, DWAIs in 1994 and 1995, DWI in 2000, and a felony DWI in 2010. 
Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, and for the same reasons discussed under 
Guideline G, incorporated herein, none of the Guideline J mitigating conditions fully 
apply. Appellant’s last criminal behavior is not recent, but happened under ordinary 
circumstances, and resulted from his alcohol dependency. Because of his long history 
of alcohol abuse and his guarded prognosis, I have questions as to Applicant’s ability to 
remain sober and avoid additional criminal misconduct. Not enough time has passed 
since his release probation in early 2013 for me to conclude that he has overcome his 
alcohol dependence. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) do not fully apply. AG ¶¶ 32(b) and (c) are not 
reasonably raised by the evidence, and are not applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s abstinence, his continued participation in alcohol counseling, and 
lifestyle changes are evidence that he is on the right path to rehabilitation. 
Notwithstanding, because of his past recidivism, doubts about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment remain. The criminal conduct concern is not fully 
mitigated. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
The SOR alleges, and the evidence established, that Applicant had 10 delinquent 
debts. He paid three debts, and the remaining seven debts total near $27,000. His 
debts became delinquent, in part, because of his alcohol dependency - he had to pay 
court fines and attorney fees resulting from his 2010 felony DWI. Additionally, he had 
extensive medical debts resulting from his daughter’s treatment. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are, in part, the result of his alcohol dependence and criminal 
misconduct. His misconduct occurred under normal circumstances, and Applicant’s 
evidence is insufficient to show that it is unlikely to recur. His criminal behavior, alcohol 
problem, and financial situation currently cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and judgment. He presented no evidence to show he participated in financial 
counseling.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for resolving three of his SOR debts, and for paying his 
daughter’s medical bills. His daughter’s medical condition is a circumstance beyond his 
control that contributed to his financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) applies, in part, but does 
not fully mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that 
he was financially responsible under the circumstances. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, and he does not have a viable plan 
to resolve his financial problems. He is also not in control of his financial situation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c))  
 
Applicant, 44, has worked as a test engineer for a government contractor while 
possessing a security clearance since 2005. He is a good father and takes care of his 
daughter. However, he demonstrated extremely bad judgment by driving while 
intoxicated on four occasions.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant has been abstinent since his 2010 felony DWI, and seems to be on the 
correct path for rehabilitation. Notwithstanding, at this time, because of his long history 
of alcohol abuse and repeated criminal misconduct, the passage of time alone is 
insufficient to establish that Applicant will remain sober, that he will not be involved in 
any further criminal misconduct, and that he will resolve his ongoing financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.f-2.h:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a, 3.b,      
 3.f-3.h:      Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.c-3.e:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Clearance is revoked. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
