 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-11959 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct and sexual behavior security concerns. 
He did not falsify his security clearance application, nor mislead investigators during the 
course of his background investigation. He also established that he did not actively seek 
out child pornography, nor intentionally download or distribute such illicit material. His 
past internet use, which left him susceptible to receiving illicit material and unfounded 
allegations of illicit activity, no longer casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and 
Guideline D (Sexual Behavior). On March 13, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing (Answer). On April 24, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case and 
after coordinating with the parties, scheduled the hearing for June 4, 2013.  
 
 
2 
 
 
At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 9. 
Applicant objected to the admission to Gx. 6, a summary of Applicant’s interview by 
another government agency (AGA). I overruled the objection and admitted Gx. 6,1 as 
well as the other exhibits to which there was no objection. 
 
 Applicant appeared at the hearing, testified, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) 
A – E, which were admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the record 
open to allow him time to submit additional matters. He timely submitted Ax. F – H, 
which were also admitted without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on 
June 11, 2013, and the record closed on June 14, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 29, is a network engineer for a federal contractor. He first applied for a 
security clearance in 2003, while in college and working as an intern for a defense 
contractor. He was granted a clearance in 2005. He graduated from college in 2006 
and, shortly thereafter, began working for his current employer as a software engineer. 
His colleagues write that he is an outstanding, hardworking employee, who has made 
significant contributions to the security of his employer’s information technology systems 
and networks. (Tr. at 25-27, 31-; Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Ax. E) 
 
 In 2001, while still in high school, Applicant and a few friends decided to 
purchase a used car. The car was burglarized and left inoperable. One of Applicant’s 
high school friends then had the foolish idea to douse the car with gasoline and set it on 
fire to see if it would burn. Applicant tried to dissuade his friend but, seeing that his 
efforts were having no effect, left the scene. He did not realize his friend had actually set 
the car on fire until the police knocked on his parents’ door and questioned him about 
the incident. Since he was a juvenile, Applicant and his parents were required to appear 
in family court to answer a misdemeanor charge of arson. He was required to take a fire 
safety course and, after successfully completing the course, the charge was dismissed. 
He was not convicted of any offense, nor placed on probation. He has not been in 
trouble with the law since this incident. (Tr. at 27-31, 37-41, 87-91, 103-106; Ax. A – C)  
 
 As previously noted, in February 2003, Applicant applied for a security clearance. 
None of the questions on this initial security clearance application (SCA) required him to 
disclose the juvenile charge, which by that point had been dismissed. (Gx. 7 at 25; Tr. at 
31-32, 91-3) During the ensuing background interview, Applicant mistakenly told the 
investigator that he had been charged with a felony and spent a year on probation on 
the charge. (Tr. at 35-36, 93-94, 103; Gx. 8) Despite providing this erroneous 
information, which magnified the severity of the juvenile court matter, Applicant was still 
granted a security clearance and has continuously held a clearance to the present day. 
(Tr. at 32; Gx. 1)  
 
                                                          
1 See generally ISCR Case No. 11-12461 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2013) (holding that the 
admission of similar documents are admissible in DOHA proceedings). 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant did not become aware that he had been charged with only a 
misdemeanor until about 2006, when he was filling out another SCA for a position 
requiring access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). His parents, who had 
primarily handled the juvenile court matter, provided him the court paperwork, including 
the charging document, a few days before his security clearance hearing. Throughout 
the hearing, it was apparent that Applicant was still confused about the juvenile court 
matter. (Tr. at 31-37, 41, 92-98, 102, 106; Ax. A)  
 
 Following the submission of his application for SCI access, Applicant was 
interviewed by AGA. (Tr. at 103) In response to an inquiry from the AGA investigators, 
Applicant did not inform them of being questioned by police regarding the incident that 
led to the misdemeanor charge. (Gx. 5; Tr. at 99-100, 104) However, prior to being 
confronted about this omission, Applicant voluntarily disclosed the information to a 
Government investigator in May 2010, who noted in his summary of interview “that this 
information was covered on the last investigation.” (Gx. 2, Personal Subject Interview on 
5/5/10 at 1; Tr. at 35) 
 
During the SCI interview, Applicant admitted to downloading music and games 
from the internet without paying for them. (Gx. 5 and 6) He also admitted that, starting at 
15 years of age, he would search for, download, and view pornography from the internet 
– some of the pornography he viewed at that time involved minors like himself. He told 
the investigator that, after turning 18, he only sought out adult pornography on the 
internet. But, admitted that he had inadvertently downloaded and viewed what he 
suspected might be child pornography on several occasions. (Gx. 6) He continued to 
search for and download pornography from the internet knowing that he was exposing 
himself to the risk that some of the material he downloaded might contain suspected 
child pornography. (Tr. at 54-55, 85-86)2  
 
Following the SCI interview, the AGA halted the processing of Applicant’s 
request for SCI access, but he retained his security clearance. (Tr. at 79, 86-87) 
Applicant changed his pornography-viewing habits after the SCI interview. He 
subscribed to pay-per-view sites that made sure “the people that were in videos, or 
pictures, were of age.” (Tr. at 55) Although none of the questions on his current SCA 
required him to reveal the information, Applicant voluntarily disclosed the fact that the 
AGA did not finalize the processing of his request for SCI access and the basis for their 
action. (Gx. 1 at 48)  
 
At hearing, Applicant explained that, starting when he was a teenager, he would 
download pornography on his personal computer, while at home, using peer-to-peer file 
sharing networks or newsgroups. If upon reviewing the files he was planning to 
download, he suspected a file or files might contain child pornography, he would not 
download it. However, he could not always tell whether a file might contain child 
pornography from just reviewing the file name. He generally selected a batch of files to 
download, left while his computer downloaded the files overnight, and then viewed the 
                                                          
2 See also Ax. D (U.S. Government report notes that “users of peer-to-peer networks are at 
significant risk of inadvertent exposure to pornography, including child pornography.”). 
 
4 
 
 
files at a later time. Whenever he viewed a file that contained suspected child 
pornography, he would immediately delete it. (Tr. at 41-48, 66-67, 82-86) He did so 
because he finds such material “disgusting” and “revolting.” (Tr. at 47-48, 85)  
 
Applicant only used his personal computer, while in the privacy of his own home, 
to search for, download, and view pornography. He was only interested in legal, adult 
pornography. He adamantly denies ever intentionally looking for, downloading, viewing, 
saving to his computer, or distributing child pornography. (Tr. at 48, 66, 76-78, 82; Gx. 
3) I found his testimony credible.  
 
 Applicant revealed the Government’s security concerns to his parents, friends, 
co-workers, and facility security officer (FSO). He even told his neighbors, whose minor 
children he regularly babysits. All provided letters attesting to his character. They all 
voiced their opinions that Applicant did not exhibit any deviant sexual behavior, nor was 
interested in illicit sexual material. His neighbors and friends continue to trust him, and 
those with children have no hesitation in having him watch their children. (Tr. at 57-64, 
70-76; Ax. E).  
 
Applicant told his wife about the Government’s concerns while they were dating. 
They recently married. She disapproves of pornography and he respects her views on 
this issue. He has not looked for, viewed, or downloaded pornography for the past three 
years. He has no plans to do so in the future. He shares his home computer with his 
wife and she has full access to it, including his passwords. (Tr. at 25, 53-57, 80-81)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
 
5 
 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. Furthermore, “[o]nce a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 
499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern regarding personal conduct is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The misdemeanor charge and Applicant’s admission during his SCI interview 
that, from age 15 to 26, he inadvertently, on several occasions, downloaded suspected 
child pornography raise a concern about his judgment. Such evidence also raises the 
applicability of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information . . . which, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
 
6 
 
 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not safeguard protected information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing . . .  
 
 The evidence also raised the applicability of the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has . . . taken other positive steps to alleviate the . . . 
factors that caused the untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated . . .; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct when he was a teenager that led to the misdemeanor charge 
was clearly aberrant behavior at the time and has not been further repeated. AG ¶¶ 
17(c) applies.3 
 
 Applicant’s viewing and downloading of pornography on his personal computer, 
in the privacy of his own home, is not conduct that would normally rise to the level of a 
security concern. However, he repeatedly exposed himself to the risk of inadvertently 
downloading child pornography by searching on peer-to-peer networks and 
newsgroups, which he knew could contain such illicit material. Such repeated, risky 
conduct, over a number of years, calls into question his judgment.  
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his past risky internet use. 
Following his SCI interview, he took responsible steps to avoid the danger of 
downloading and viewing illicit material. In addition, as of the hearing, he had not 
                                                          
3 Although, apparently this issue was previously favorably adjudicated, the Government is not 
estopped from reexamining prior conduct, when such conduct, coupled with current information, may 
raise a security concern. 
 
7 
 
 
viewed any pornography for over three years. Moreover, he has not engaged in any 
other questionable activity over the internet since his SCI interview. For instance, he 
now pays for music and games he lawfully downloads from the internet.4 In light of 
Applicant’s more than three-year history of responsible internet use and change in 
personal circumstances, I find that it is unlikely he would engage in risky or questionable 
internet behavior in the future.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant proved that he did not intentionally look for or download 
child pornography. He has consistently maintained that, after turning 18 years of age, 
he did not intentionally look for or download such illicit material.5 Those who have lived 
and worked with him over the years, uniformly state that they have never known him to 
harbor such deviant sexual interest. By fully informing his family, friends, and employer 
about the Government’s concerns, he has removed the potential threat that his past 
internet viewing habits could be used as a source of coercion or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c) – 
(f) apply to the allegations arising from Applicant’s past risky internet use.  
 
 Applicant’s omission of the 2001 misdemeanor charge, in response to relevant 
questions regarding his criminal history, on both his 2006 and 2010 SCAs, was also 
alleged as a security concern under Guideline E.6 The SOR further alleges that, when 
questioned by the other government agency, Applicant did not reveal his contact with 
police in 2001. The omission of material, adverse information standing alone is not 
enough to establish that an individual intentionally falsified his or her application or 
attempted to mislead investigators during the course of a background investigation. 
Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances surrounding 
the omission to determine an individual’s true intent.7  
                                                          
4 Although not alleged, I considered this past conduct, admitted to during the SCI interview, in 
assessing Applicant’s mitigation case. 
 
5 In reaching this conclusion, I have taken into account all the favorable and unfavorable evidence 
in the file, to include Applicant’s statements during the SCI interview, as summarized in Gx. 6. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 10-07794 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 4, 2011) (discussing judge’s obligation to 
determine the facts, after taking into account and resolving any discrepancies raised by the evidence). 
 
6 The SOR alleges in ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f that Applicant failed to disclose the 2001 misdemeanor 
charge in response to a question on his 2006 and 2010 SCA asking if he had ever been charged or 
convicted of a felony offense. At the close of the hearing, after Applicant had presented his case and both 
parties had made their respective closing arguments, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to 
allege that Applicant falsified a different question on his 2006 SCA. I denied the motion because no new 
evidence was presented at hearing to justify the amendment and it would have been unfair to Applicant. 
(Tr. at 149-155) However, I recognize limiting my review of Applicant’s eligibility to the confines of an 
inartfully worded SOR allegation would be inconsistent with the overall purpose of the industrial clearance 
program. ISCR Case No. 04-08547 (App. Bd. Aug. 30, 2007). Accordingly, I have examined the entire 
record, to include Applicant’s responses to all SCA questions, in assessing his credibility and case in 
mitigation. See ISCR Case No. 10-03732 (App. Bd. Jun. 14, 2013) (favorable decision reversed, in part, 
because judge did not consider other potential false statements not alleged in the SOR in assessing 
applicant’s credibility). See also ISCR Case No. 07-16653 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012); Fed. R. Evid. 404(b).  
 
7 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003).  
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s omission of the misdemeanor charge in response to questions posed 
on his recent SCAs was not intentional. He honestly did not believe that disclosure of 
the misdemeanor charge was required. The charge had been dismissed more than 
seven years before he submitted his most recent SCA, and he had informed the 
Government of the charge and underlying conduct that resulted in the juvenile charge 
during his initial background investigation in 2003.8  
 
 Moreover, Applicant voluntarily disclosed on his current SCA the significant, 
potentially adverse information that led the other government agency to halt the 
processing of his application for SCI access. Such voluntary disclosure demonstrates 
that he can be trusted to reveal security significant information no matter the potential 
personal ramification. It is also strong circumstantial evidence that he was not trying to 
hide a juvenile charge for an incident that took place some 12 years ago.  
 
 Applicant also disclosed and discussed his contact with police and the resulting 
juvenile charge during his recent periodic reinvestigation in May 2010. This voluntary 
disclosure took place before he was ever confronted with his purported omission of this 
information on his SCAs and during his SCI interview.9  
 
 After having an opportunity to fully review the evidence and observe Applicant’s 
demeanor while he testified, I find that he did not falsify his SCAs or attempt to mislead 
investigators during the course of an interview focused on his internet viewing habits, 
when he stated that he had no contact with police in the past. He has repeatedly 
exhibited the high level of integrity, candor, and honesty expected of those granted 
access to classified information. Accordingly, the falsification allegations, SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 
1.f, are decided in his favor.  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
                                                          
8 Applicant’s confusion during his 2003 interview regarding whether he was charged with a 
misdemeanor and/or felony is understandable, as is the Government’s initial reliance upon his statement. 
However, Ax. A and B, establish that Applicant was only charged with a misdemeanor. 
 
9 Cf. AG ¶ 17(a). Of note, Applicant’s recent background interview, where he fully discussed the 
juvenile incident and other relevant issues, occurred three years before the SOR was issued. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant’s past internet pornography use, which resulted in the inadvertent 
downloading and viewing of suspected child pornography on a number of occasions, 
raises this concern and implicates the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13:  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Applicant ceased viewing and downloading pornography from the internet three 
years ago and prior to that had taken steps to avoid the danger of inadvertently viewing 
or downloading suspected child pornography. He has told all those around him of the 
Government’s concerns and in so doing eliminated the risk that his past conduct could 
be used to adversely influence him. He established the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 14:  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).10 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guidelines 
D and E, and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance since 2005 without once compromising 
or mishandling classified information. He has made significant contributions to his 
employer’s information technology systems over the years. Security clearance 
adjudications entail a certain degree of predictive judgment, where an applicant’s past 
history is the best indicator of future conduct. Applicant established that he has a history 
of properly safeguarding this nation’s secrets and there is no reason to doubt his ability 
to do so going forward. 
                                                          
10 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) 
the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
(5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
10 
 
 
 Furthermore, he has matured greatly and changed his personal habits for the 
better since meeting his wife. These favorable whole-person factors, coupled with the 
mitigating conditions noted above, mitigate the remaining security concerns at issue. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D (Sexual Behavior):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for continued access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
