 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11000 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E, personal 
conduct and F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR on April 8, 2013, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 23, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on May 23, 2013, scheduling the hearing for June 11, 2013. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 16 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. She submitted documents that were marked 
AE D through H and admitted without objection. Correspondence about the additional 
exhibits is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 17, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She seeks to retain 
her security clearance. She is married with two children, and she is pregnant expecting 
her third child. She also has three stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1999. She then attended a community 
college until about 2001, but she did not obtain a degree. Since 2007, she has attended 
on-line classes through three different colleges, but she has not obtained a degree from 
any of them.2  
 
 Applicant submitted resumes for employment in the U.S. Government in about 
2003 and 2005. In both resumes, she listed that she attended a university that she has 
never attended (X University). In her 2003 resume, she wrote: “Graduation date 2004 of 
Bachelor of Arts.” In her 2005 resume, she wrote: “Graduation date December 2005 of 
Bachelor of Arts.”3 
 
 In 2007, Applicant lost her job with a government agency for falsifying her 
timecards. Applicant testified that she was a probationary employee. She stated that 
she actually worked the hours, but during a different pay period.4 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for a period in 2008, and she received unemployment 
compensation. She went back to work in April 2008. She did not notify the 
unemployment compensation office that she was working, and she continued to receive 
unemployment compensation for about two and a half weeks. The overpayments were 
discovered in an audit in May 2012. She was overpaid $954, which was recovered 
through a recoupment of $120 and an offset of $834. Applicant stated that she did not 
understand the process, and she did not know when she had to notify the 
unemployment compensation office that she had returned to work.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 48-49, 52, 63-64; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 22-26, 32, 44-45, 55; GE 2: AE F-H. 
 
3 Tr. at 34-35, 54, 64; GE 9, 10; AE C. 
 
4 Tr. at 37-38, 55-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 38-39, 58-62; GE 2, 11; AE C. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) in April 
2008. Under education, she listed her high school and that she attended X University 
from 1999 until May 2007. She also listed that she received a “Degree” in May 2007.6 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for her background investigation by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on June 10, 2008. A signed statement was 
not taken, but the interview was summarized in a report of investigation (ROI). She told 
the investigator that she did not graduate from X University in May 2007. She stated 
that she thought she was going to graduate. However, a university director told her in 
April 2006 that she needed three additional courses to graduate. The OPM investigator 
contacted Applicant by telephone on June 26, 2008. She admitted that she had never 
attended X University. She told the investigator that X University accepted her for 
enrollment in August 2007, but she did not attend the college because she found out 
that she would lose credits if she enrolled there.7  
 
 Applicant submitted at least two resumes to her former employer in about 2010. 
Her former employer reformatted the resumes and made the resumes available to 
subcontractors who chose to utilize Applicant’s services. In one resume, Applicant 
stated that she attended X University and received a “B.A. 05/2008.” In the second 
resume, she stated that she attended one of the on-line universities that she actually 
has attended, but she again stated that she received a “B.A. 05/2008.”8 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information about her education on 
her resumes and during the security clearance process. She stated that she attended X 
University because that is where she intended to attend. She stated she listed that she 
obtained a bachelor’s degree because that is when she anticipated that she would 
graduate. She also indicated that she was undergoing stress from some medical 
procedures, and she did not look as carefully at the forms as she should have.9 I did not 
find Applicant’s testimony credible. I find that she intentionally provided false information 
about her education on resumes submitted in 2003, 2005, and 2010; on her 2008 SF 
85P; and during her OPM interview in 2008. 
 
 Applicant was asked if she listed on her resume for her current employer that she 
had a degree and if her current employer believes she has a degree. She answered she 
“probably” did list a degree and her employer “probably” believes she has a degree.10   
 
                                                          
6 GE 12. 
 
7 Tr. at 39-40; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 64-65, 81; GE 2, 13-15; AE C. 
 
9 Tr. at 32-36, 40, 66-68, 83; AE C. 
 
10 Tr. at 65-68. Any false statement that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for several years. Her husband has been 
unemployed since December 2011.11 
 
 The SOR alleges eight past-due student loans with balances totaling about 
$28,000, a charged-off credit union debt ($4,787) and a mortgage loan that was $9,774 
past due with a $149,000 balance. All of the debts appear on at least one credit report.  
   
 Applicant admitted owing the student loans, but they are deferred because she is 
attending college. She submitted a document establishing that she has 12 student loans 
in deferment until October 2015. The balance of the 12 loans is $45,820.12 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $4,787 charged-off credit union debt. On May 14, 
2013, she agreed to pay $100 per month on the account. She paid $100 on June 10, 
2013.13 
 
 Applicant bought a house for about $156,000 in 2008. The house was financed 
with a mortgage loan in her name. Applicant and her family moved to a larger house 
that was purchased by her husband in about 2011. She attempted to sell the first house, 
but it had depreciated in value, and she was unable to sell it for what was owed on the 
mortgage loan. She attempted to rent the property, but did not have tenants who paid 
the rent on time. She has not paid the mortgage loan in almost two years. She is 
seeking a loan modification of the mortgage.14 
 
 Applicant has not received formal financial counseling. She indicated that her 
finances are tight, but she is able to pay her bills.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 23-24, 48, 53-54. 
 
12 Tr. at 22-25, 41-45; GE 3-5; AE C, E. 
 
13 Tr. at 22-23, 45-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6; AE C. 
 
14 Tr. at 26-31, 46-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6; AE A, B. 
 
15 Tr. at 54, 62-63. 
 
5 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
6 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or 
unwilling to pay her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused or aggravated by her husband’s 
unemployment. That is beyond her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 In about 2011, Applicant and her family moved to a larger house before she sold 
the house she bought in 2008. She is seeking a loan modification, but she has not paid 
the mortgage loan in almost two years. Her student loans of about $45,000 are in 
deferment until 2015. She has made one $100 payment towards the $4,787 charged-off 
credit union debt.  
 
 Applicant’s student loans are temporarily resolved. However, I am unable to find 
that she acted responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort 
to pay her debts. Her finances are not yet under control. Her financial issues are recent 
and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable 
to the deferred student loans. It is not applicable to the other debts. I find that financial 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about her education on 
resumes submitted in 2003, 2005, and 2010; on her 2008 SF 85P; and during her OPM 
interview in 2008. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are applicable.  
 
Applicant lost her job with a government agency in 2007 for falsifying her 
timecards. In 2008, she did not notify the unemployment compensation office that she 
was working, and she continued to receive unemployment compensation for about two 
and a half weeks. Her conduct showed poor judgment and an unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. It also created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(b), 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant’s denials that she intentionally provided false information about her 
education were not credible. She admitted that she “probably” listed on her resume for 
her current employer that she had a degree and that her employer “probably” believes 
she has a degree. There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has unresolved financial problems, and she has been consistently 
untruthful about her education since 2003.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
