1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-13242
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
                                           For Applicant: Nicole A. Smith, Esq.                                        
                                   
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL,  Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On February 27, 2013, the Department of Defense (DO  D i)ssued to the above-
referenced Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR). The SOR enumerated security
concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline E (Personal
Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). DOD took action under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.   
In a response dated March 26, 2013, Applicant admitted the allegations raised
under Guideline F and Guideline E, denied the allegation set forth under Guideline J,
and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on April 22, 2013. Applicant
agreed to a hearing date of May 23, 2013, and a notice setting the hearing for that date
was issued on May 2, 2013.  
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Applicant testified and introduced 26
documents, which were accepted without objection as exhibits (Exs.) A-Z. The
Government offered three documents, which were accepted into the record as Exs. 1-3
without objection. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received on June 6, 2013,
 Tr. 21-22.       1
 Tr. 22.      2
 Tr. 23, 27. The SOR alleges and Applicant admitted that Applicant willfully failed to file her state and      3
Federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 to 2011. At the hearing, Applicant further admitted that her
failure to file first occurred in 2005, not 2007. See Tr. 20, 23. The SOR is thus amended to reflect that
correction.
 Tr. 39.      4
2
and the record was closed. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions, and
exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet her burden of mitigating security concerns
related to financial considerations. Clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old administrative assistant who has worked for her
current employer since 2003. She has worked for the U.S. government for 38 years.
During most of that time, she held a security clearance, which was granted and
maintained as the result of having completed a security clearance application (SCA)
three or four times since first starting her federal service. Applicant’s duties are mostly
clerical in nature. She has always worked two jobs, either a full-time job and a part-time
job, or two full-time positions. In addition to the current position under scrutiny here, she
presently works a part-time security position. Applicant is a high school graduate who
attended college, but had not completed a degree program. She is married.
In 2005, all of Applicant’s tax information and her husband’s business
information were lost when a family computer crashed and the hard drive was
corrupted. They took it to multiple individuals to salvage the computer and its contents,
but nobody could retrieve anything from the unit. With the computerized information
unavailable, it “would have made it fairly cumbersome and difficult” to otherwise cull the
information from, for example, boxed files.  The boxes that would contain such1
information were among many boxes which had been moved a number of times and
spread out through their home.  In turn, Applicant’s tax information would have been2
boxed together with her husband’s business documents, making the task of culling
through the boxes more difficult. Consequently, Applicant did not file her state or
Federal income tax return for tax year 2005, in violation of Title 26, United States Code,
Section 7203. 
Applicant continued not to file her state or Federal income tax returns through tax
year 2011 because she was under the false impression she could not file for
subsequent years until the initial missed year had been filed.  Each time tax season3
would arrive she would say, “well how can I file? I can’t file it because . . . . I had to file
each one in succession.”  She did not believe this was a problem in situations such as4
hers, where refunds were owed and no additional payments to the IRS were owed. She
 Tr. 33-34. Applicant does not remember the SCA asking if she had timely filed her federal taxes. She      5
admits that she never listed on the SCA any references to her failure to file state or Federal income tax filings.
 Applicant’s husband has been out of work for several years and his business has not generated any      6
reportable income for the past couple of years, although the business technically remains an active business.
Tr. 40-41.
 Ex. 2 (SCA) at 29 of 32.      7
 At one point, Applicant responded by stating “yes” to the suggestion she provided “false information during      8
[her] interview” because she was ashamed and scared. Tr. 53. W hen commenting on her own without
prompting, Applicant never went so far as to suggest her answers were intentionally false. See, e.g., Tr. 54.
The evidence indicates Applicant has little memory of the interview or her answers. See, e.g., Tr. 55-56
 Tr. 42.      9
3
was not aware her actions might have repercussions in terms of her maintaining a
security clearance.  Meanwhile, her husband’s health and his business declined.5 6
In June 2011, a state tax lien for about $4,000 was instituted against Applicant
through her part-time job. Applicant neither disputed nor investigated the basis of the
lien. That lien was ultimately satisfied through payroll deduction. 
Applicant completed a SCA in July 2011. On the SCA, at Section 26 (Financial
Record), Applicant acknowledged a state tax lien under subsection one. Under
subsection two, she noted that she had either failed to pay federal, state, or other taxes,
or to file a tax return.  She met with investigators in August 2011, during which time tax7
filings were discussed, but her failure to file for multiple tax years was not explored. She
also told the investigator that she had jointly filed taxes with her husband in 2009, but
had been unable to pay the balance owed. She later reported that she had always paid
her taxes, including her 2010 taxes. Applicant attributes these two incorrect answers to
nerves, embarrassment, and feeling the need to provide some answer despite her
failure to fully understand the lien situation. She was ashamed and scared.  She does8
not remember telling the investigator that she owed taxes because, as recently
confirmed with her belated tax filings, none were owed. With regard to the status of her
taxes overall, Applicant is generally confused, unclear, or imprecise with regard to the
nuances related to tax reporting; her stated reliance on a tax professional was credibly
underscored by her testimony and demeanor. 
When she reconnected with her former tax preparer in January 2013, Applicant
discovered that she did not need to first file her 2005 tax forms before she could file for
subsequent tax years. Applicant then felt confused and ashamed for not having better
understood the rules, for not having sought advice from her family, and for not having
made contact with her tax preparer earlier. Until she learned this fact, she had thought
about contacting an accountant, but had not done so.  When asked whether her intent9
had been “to just not file [taxes] in the future,” she responded, “No, I was, I mean, the
 Tr. 41-42.      10
 Tr. 25.      11
 Tr. 25.      12
 Tr. 29-31.      13
4
IRS knows where I am. And I’ve talked to an individual before. But since I had always
gotten a refund, I didn’t think I was hurting anyone other than myself without filing.”10
In January 2013, Applicant engaged her former tax preparer “to do the very
laborious preparing” of the couples’ joint tax return filings for tax years 2005 through
2012.  The SOR was issued in February 2013. The tax preparer took longer than11
expected to prepare the filings due to a death in the family and difficulty in locating
certain tax and mortgage forms. Applicant filed her state returns for 2005 through 2011,
as well as her return for 2012, between mid-April 2013 and mid-May 2013. She hand-
carried the 2005 through 2012 filings to her local IRS branch on May 22, 2013, where
they were stamped as received and began processing.  No money was owed for any12
of the state or Federal tax years at issue. All filings were in refund status, although the
lateness of the filings obviated payment of the available refunds for at least most of the
tax years at issue.13
I take judicial notice that 26 U.S.C. § 7203 (Willful failure to file return, supply
information, or pay tax) states:
Any person required under this title to pay any estimated tax or tax,
or required by this title or by regulations made under authority
thereof to make a return, keep any records, or supply any
information, who willfully fails to pay such estimated tax or tax, make
such return, keep such records, or supply such information, at the
time or times required by law or regulations, shall, in addition to other
penalties provided by law, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $25,000 ($100,000
in the case of a corporation), or imprisoned not more than 1 year, or
both, together with the costs of prosecution.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      14
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      15
 Id.      16
 Id.      17
5
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a14
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  15
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access16
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.17
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
 AG ¶ 18.      18
6
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.18
Applicant knowingly failed to file state and Federal income tax returns for tax years
2005 to 2011, as required. Such facts are sufficient to raise Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(g): 
— failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required
or the fraudulent filing of the same.
With a disqualifying condition raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
her and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant first failed to file her state and Federal tax returns for the 2005 tax
year. She did so because important information regarding her taxes and her husband’s
business’ taxes were lost when a family computer crashed and the hard drive was
corrupted. This situation was obviously out of her control. 
Backup files or alternative sources were available in storage, but the prospect of
culling through those boxes was daunting and would have demanded significant time.
Applicant chose not to go through the family records to find the information necessary
for completing their 2005 joint filing. At the time, she was under the incorrect
assumption that if one did not file taxes for one year, then one was precluded from filing
for subsequent tax years until the missed year was filed. 
Applicant did nothing significant to verify with a tax or financial counselor that this
information was correct, nor did she make any notable strides to work on the 2005 tax
year filing until 2013. There is no evidence that Applicant ever initiated an effort to
complete tax year 2005 filings in the interim, despite the fact she was informed in 2011
that her tax issues were under scrutiny as part of the security clearance renewal
process. But for her recent January 2013 reunion with her former tax preparation
professional and her even more recent Spring 2013 tax filings, it appears likely that her
taxes would have remained unfiled to date. Applicant’s attempt at corrective action that
could demonstrate a renewed commitment to pro-active reliability and sound judgment
occurred less than a year ago. More than a few months is necessary to make such a
demonstration. Neither Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶
20(a):
–– the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment – 
nor AG ¶ 20(b):
 AG ¶ 15.      19
7
— the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation)
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances — 
applies.
Applicant used the services of a tax preparation professional, but there is no
evidence that she has received actual financial counseling. However, although it did not
occur until shortly before the May 2013 hearings, Applicant filed her state and Federal
taxes for tax years 2005 to 2011. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) applies in part: 
— the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control.
None of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  Here, Applicant gave19
incorrect information to an investigator in August 2011 indicating that she had filed state
and Federal income taxes for tax year 2009. If her statement was intentionally false,
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 16(b):
— deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official government
representative — 
and AG ¶ 16 (e) 
— personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . . . — 
 apply. Consequently, the burden is on Applicant to mitigate security concerns.
In discussing both the interview and her overall situation regarding her tax filings,
Applicant credibly conceded that she was confused about her entire tax situation. Her
 AG ¶ 30.      20
8
confusion is apparent from the facts. She noted that she had tax and tax filing issues in
her July 2011 SCA, which was submitted before her investigative interview. She
credibly laments not contemporaneously discussing her financial situation with family or
a tax professional. At the hearing, her explanations for making these and other incorrect
answers range from embarrassment, confusion, and willingness to provide some form
of answer so as not to seem ignorant of her situation. While her answer to the
investigator regarding the 2009 tax year was admittedly incorrect, it does not seem to
have been made to purposefully obfuscate or falsify, especially given the more
comprehensive answer given on the July 2011 SCA. However, had intentional falsity
been indicated,  Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 17(e): 
— the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress —  
would apply.
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
The concern under this guideline is that criminal activity creates doubt about a
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  In20
this case, Applicant admitted that she knowingly and purposefully chose not to file her
state and Federal income tax returns for tax years 2005 to 2011. Such failure is in
violation of Title 26, United States Code, § 7203. This is sufficient to raise both Criminal
Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 31(a):
— a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses — 
and AG ¶ 31(c): 
— allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
Consequently, it is Applicant’s burden to mitigate the security concerns raised.
When her tax information was lost in a computer mishap, Applicant forewent
filing her 2005 state and Federal income taxes. She did not search hard documents she
and her husband had boxed, archived, and stored because it would take too much time
and effort to cull through the boxes for the needed documents. She did not consult a
tax preparation professional for guidance. Instead, she did not file income tax returns
for tax years 2006 to 2011. She failed to file for those years not because she intended
to circumvent the law or avoid Internal Revenue Service scrutiny, but because she was
under the mistaken belief that she could not file for subsequent years until the 2005
filing was completed. 
9
As the years passed and more tax years went unfiled, Applicant took no
corrective action regarding her tax filing obligations. But for this process, Applicant’s
inaction might have continued. It is clear that Applicant now knows she has a  duty to
file annually. It is doubtful that she will again decline to file her taxes. However, failing to
file, failing to go through her stored documents for backup hard copies, and failing to
approach a tax preparation professional within one or two years of missing an annual
filing demonstrates poor judgment and reliability. Therefore, Criminal Conduct Mitigating
Condition AG ¶ 32(a): 
— so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened,
or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment — 
does not apply.
Within the past year, Applicant reunited with her tax professional. She now
understands that tax filings are required by law. With the help of her tax preparer,
Applicant has filed all the state and Federal tax documents that needed to be filed. All
state and Federal tax filings have been completed. When she discovered her error, she
was extremely embarrassed and sorry. She is credibly contrite about her lapse in
judgment. She stresses that she owed no taxes for the years belatedly filed. In light of
these considerations, I find that AG ¶ 32(d): 
— there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement — 
applies.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. In addition, what constitutes reasonable behavior in such cases,
as contemplated by FC MC ¶ 20(b), depends on the specific facts in a given case. 
I considered the specific facts and circumstances in this case. Applicant is a
mature woman who has maintained a security clearance for many years without
incident. Industrious by nature, she has worked two jobs throughout her professional
career. She is supporting her husband, who is in ill health and whose business is not
generating income. 
10
In failing to file her state and Federal income tax forms for multiple years,
Applicant did not intend to violate or skirt the law. To the contrary, she earnestly
believed that she could not submit subsequent tax year filings until her 2005 joint filing
was made. This may well explain why there were no filings for 2006 and, perhaps,
2007. Sound and reliable judgment, however, would have led a responsible person to
either submit a belated 2005 filing or contact either the Internal Revenue Service or a
tax preparation professional within a year or two, if not a reasonable amount of time, to
resolve the situation. It was not reasonable to simply continue neglecting the situation,
even after her taxes were raised as potential security issues during her 2011 interview
with an investigator. Although she lacked the requisite intent to necessarily raise her
actions to the level of criminal violations, and while it is clear that some of her
comments regarding her tax situation were knee jerk responses to questions for which
she had no valid answers, her failure to finally address her tax filing issues until shortly
before the hearing sustains related security concerns. At least one tax year is needed to
provide Applicant with the time necessary to demonstrate that she has the requisite
knowledge of how to responsibly handle her state and Federal tax obligations.
Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL
Administrative Judge
