1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-12671
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Barry M. Sax, Esquire
June 7, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on March 22, 2010.  On November 7, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
B for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 26, 2012.  He
answered the SOR in writing on January 2, 2013, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on January 14, 2013, and I received
the case assignment on March 25, 2013.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 2,
2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 9, 2013.  The Government
offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, which were received without objection.  Applicant
testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through H, which were
No PHX N was submitted.1
2
received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on May
17, 2013.  I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until May 23, 2013, to
submit additional matters.  On May 17, 2013, he submitted Post Hearing Exhibits
(PHXs) A~M and O~W, which were received in a timely fashion.   On May 29, 2013,1
Department Counsel averred that he had no objection to the PHXs. The record closed
on May 29, 2013.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Japan.  The request was granted.  The request, and the
attached documents, were not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record.
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.h., and 1.j. through of the SOR, with explanations.  He
denied the factual allegation in Subparagraph 1.i. of the SOR.  He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
1.a.  Applicant’s spouse of 26 years is a permanent resident of the United States,
but is a citizen of Japan.  (TR at page 45 lines 22~24, GX 2 at pages 20~22, and GX 3
at page 1.)  She has no intention of becoming a U.S. citizen, as “all of her family is in
Japan.  That’s her cultural roots, where she grew up.  She wants to be able to go back
and forth between the United States and Japan, and be able to stay for extended
periods in Japan with having to worry about a visa . . .”  (TR at page 52 line 17 to page
53 line 16.)  She knows Applicant has a security clearance.  (TR at page 98 lines 4~23.)
1.c., and 1.f.~1.l.  Applicant’s wife is very close to her father, who for about 25
years was a Senator of the Japanese Government, retiring in a bout 1991.  He is 86
years old and in poor health.  (TR at page 53 line 24 to page 54 line 21, GX 2 at pages
28~29, and GX 3 at page 2.)  He maintains contact with some of his former Japanese
Government staff members.  (Id.)  As Applicant can speak very little Japanese, when
his spouse and father-in-law communicate, he does not know the topic of their
conversation.  (TR at page 98 lines 4~23.)
Since 1989, Applicant has traveled to Japan on a yearly basis to visit his wife’s
family.  (TR at page 70 line 17 to page 71 line 18, at page 92 lines 16~24, GX 1 at
3
pages 28~30, GX 2 at pages 39~43, and at page 3 at page 4.)  In 2004, Applicant also
traveled to China with his wife and her father.  That trip was paid for by Applicant’s
father-in-law, and Applicant attended a diner with the spouses of some of his father-in-
law’s Chinese contacts.  (TR at page 72 line 5 to page 73 line 17.)  In the 1970s, his
father-in-law was instrumental in opening up relations between China and Japan.  (Id.)
Applicant’s in-laws have also provided monetary support to his family.  In 1987,
they received a wedding gift of about $200,000.  (TR at page 73 line 18 to page 74 line
11.)  From 1987~1989, his in-laws paid for his family’s living expenses so that Applicant
could attend college full time.  (TR at page 77 line 3 to page 78 line 15.)  They also paid
about $70,000 in tuition costs for both Applicant’s BS and MBA degrees.  (TR at page
44 line 24 to page 45 line 3, and at page 47 lines 14~23.)  In 1996, his in-laws paid the
balance of Applicant’s mortgage loan, about $435,000.  (TR at page 78 line 16 to 80 line
14.)  At one time, his in-laws provided his spouse with a credit card by which they
covered her routine yearly purchases of between $4,000~$5,000.  (TR at page 80 line
15 to page 81 line 10.)  His father-in-law no longer covers these credit card purchases.
(Id.)
1.b.  Applicant’s two children are dual nationals, but both intend to renounce their
Japanese citizenship when they reach 24 years of age.  (TR at page 47 line 25 to page
52 line 16.)  It is Applicant’s understanding that Japan does not recognize dual
citizenship of a person who has reached the age of 24.  (Id.)
1.d.  Applicant’s sister-in-law and brother-in-law are both citizens and residents of
Japan.  She is a housewife and he is a medical doctor.  Neither of these in-laws have
any connection with the Japanese Government.  (TR at page 67 line 17 to page 68 line
5, at page 98 line 24 to page 99 line 9.)
1.e.  Applicant’s spouse has a friend who is a citizen of Japan, but resides in the
United States.  (TR at page 69 line 24 to page 70 line 16, at page 99 lines 10~23, and
GX 3 at page 4.)  She works for a U.S. university.  (TR at page 99 lines 10~23.)
I also take administrative notice of the following facts.  In 2000, Japan was listed
as among the most active collectors of economic and proprietary information based
upon a survey by the National Counterintelligence Executive of selected Fortune 500
companies.  Furthermore, in 2005 and 2007, Japan ranked high on the National
Counterintelligence Executive’s list of foreign countries requesting the most visits to
U.S. military facilities, defense contractors, and Department of Energy National Nuclear
Security Administration facilities.  A high volume of such visits creates opportunities for
foreign intelligence efforts against sensitive U.S. technologies.  In fact, foreign
government organizations, including intelligence and security services, frequently target
and collect information through official contacts and visits to the U.S.
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
5
Analysis
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Paragraph 6 of the adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern relating
to Foreign Influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign interests, may be manipulated or induced
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that
is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by a
foreign interest.
Here, Paragraphs 7(a), 7(d) and 7(h) are applicable: 7(a) “contacts with a foreign
family member . . . who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion”; 7(d) “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion”; and 7(h) “indications that representatives or
nationals from a foreign country are acting to increase vulnerability of the individual to
possible future exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”
Applicant’s spouse, with whom he obviously shares living quarters, and her father are
citizens of Japan.  His father-in-law was a high ranking official in the Japanese
Government.  He has also contributed in excess of $700,000 to Applicant and to
Applicant’s immediate family.
I find no countervailing mitigating condition that is applicable, here.  The first
mitigating condition under Paragraph 8(a) is applicable where “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, . . . are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual . . .
and the interests of the U.S.”  Here, however, Applicant’s spouse, and to perhaps a
lesser extent Applicant, are clearly beholden to Applicant’s father-in-law, a former long-
standing Japanese Senator, due to his extensive financial support.  She is a Japanese
national, who speaks to her father in Japanese, a language Applicant does not
understand.  As a minimum, there is a heightened risk that, unbeknownst to Applicant
and perhaps even to his spouse, she may be used to manipulate Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
6
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I have considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Although it is clear that the Applicant is a
patriot and highly respected by all who know him (AppXs A~H, and PHXs A~M and
O~W); overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his Foreign Influence.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
