 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12276 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 12, 2013, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 31, 2013, 
scheduling the hearing for June 12, 2013, and the hearing convened on that date. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 19, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2008. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He has a Ph.D. He is married with a nine-year-old child. He also has an adult 
child from a previous relationship.1 
  
 Applicant’s finances were unremarkable until about 2006. He had a good job, 
and his wife received her degree in December 2005. He thought he might lose his job 
through downsizing, so he started looking in other geographic areas. His wife received a 
job offer in a state with a lower cost of living than the area where they were living, and at 
a salary that was close to what he was earning. Applicant was confident that he could 
find a job at the new location. He quit his job in February 2006, and they moved to 
where she was offered the job.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife developed medical problems that prevented her from working at 
her new job. Applicant was unable to find a job that was commensurate with his 
education and experience, and he had to accept a low-paying job. He was unable to 
pay all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent.3 
 
 In March 2008, Applicant moved again to accept a job with his current employer. 
He once again was earning a good salary, but his wife was unable to find a job. She 
decided to further her education with a post-graduate degree. She received her degree 
in 2011, but still could not find a good job. In about 2009 and again in 2011, Applicant 
moved to different homes, but continued to work at the same location.4 
 
 In 2012, Applicant moved at his company’s request to a job site that was about 
200 miles from where he was living and working. He probably would have lost his job if 
he did not accept the move. Applicant’s wife found a job at their new location. After 
about a month, her employer realized that there was not enough work, and cut her 
hours back to about eight hours every two weeks. Her employer let her out of her two-
year contract, but required that she repay a $5,000 bonus that she had received.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 30-33, 42; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 27-28, 33-35; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 28, 33-39; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 28, 33, 39-43, 46-48; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 24-26, 29, 48-52; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts. All of the debts appear on at least one 
credit report. Applicant denied owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m ($726) and 1.n 
($3,393). He admitted owing the remaining debts, which total about $9,700.  
 
 On April 13, 2013, Applicant paid the $341 debt to a utility company that is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. On May 30, 2013, he paid the $25 medial debt that is alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.p.6 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $726 debt to a telecommunications company that is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. He credibly testified that he was released from his contract for 
cell phone services when he moved to a location where the company did not provide 
service.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n alleges a $3,393 delinquent debt to a credit card company. Applicant 
admitted that he had an account with the credit card company that he has not paid. The 
credit card company sued him, but the case was dismissed without prejudice upon the 
plaintiff’s motion to dismiss. It is unclear why the credit card company moved to dismiss 
the suit.8  
 
 Applicant has not paid any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. He testified that 
he paid some debts to family members. His wife has debts that are in her name alone. 
He stated that they have concentrated on paying the debts in her name. They want to 
increase his wife’s credit score and save for a down payment so that they can buy a 
home. He has not received formal financial counseling, but he has discussed his debts 
with a financial counselor. He stated that he intends to pay or settle debts that are still 
on his credit report. He was told that his credit score could go down if he pays or settles 
debts that are no longer on his credit report. He stated that he plans to eventually 
attempt to settle the debts that are no longer on his credit report. He stated that he has 
learned from the experience, and that his financial problems will not be repeated.9 
 
Applicant’s supervisor has known him for more than 15 years. They attended 
graduate school together, and he hired Applicant. He praised Applicant’s excellent job 
performance, trustworthiness, dependability, loyalty, reliability, and honesty.10   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 53-54, 61-62; AE A, B. 
 
7 Tr. at 57-59; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
8 Tr. at 59-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 29-30, 44-46, 50-51, 62-69, 73-74; GE 2-5. 
 
10 Tr. at 20-23. 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant had a good job in 2006, but he thought he might lose his job through 
downsizing. His wife received a job offer in a state with a lower cost of living than the 
area where they were living, and at a salary that was close to what he was earning. 
They moved to the new location, but Applicant was unable to find a job that was 
commensurate with his previous job, and his wife developed medical problems that 
prevented her from working at her new job. They moved again in 2008 so that Applicant 
could accept a job with his current employer. In 2012, they had to move again at his 
 
6 
 
company’s request to a job site that was about 200 miles from where he was living and 
working. His wife’s medical problems and their employment issues were beyond his 
control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer since 2008. In that time he has 
made minimal payments toward his delinquent debts. He stated that he has paid some 
loans to family members and some debts that are solely in his wife’s name. They want 
to increase his wife’s credit score and save for a down payment so that they can buy a 
home. He discussed his debts with a financial counselor. He was advised not to pay 
debts that are no longer on his credit report as that would lower his credit score.  
 
  Applicant is credited with paying two debts totaling $366. However, I am unable 
to find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith 
effort to pay his other debts. His finances are not yet under control. His financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. AG 
¶ 20(e) is applicable to the disputed telecommunications debt. It is not applicable to the 
credit card debt that resulted in a dismissed lawsuit. I find that financial concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, he has not 
convinced me that his finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
