 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case: 11-12742 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s trustworthiness concerns 
raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. His eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
On February 14, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 9, 2013, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline H, (Drug 
Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the case decided on 
the written record in lieu of a hearing.1 On March 30, 2013, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy the same day. Applicant received the FORM on March 26, 
2013, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant wrote on and resubmitted Items 1 and 2 as an additional 
response to the FORM.2 On May 28, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted with modifications the allegations 
contained in Paragraphs 1.a and 1.b of the SOR. He neither admitted nor denied the 
allegation in Paragraph 1.c. His admissions, including those made in response to DOHA 
Interrogatories, are incorporated into the findings herein. (Items 2, 6.)  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and has been married to his second wife since 2006. 
He has a 17-year-old son and two daughters ages 15 and 6. He has a bachelor’s 
degree in management information systems. Since May 1999, he has worked as an 
applications consultant for a defense contractor. (Item 5)  
 
 In July 2011, a Government investigator interviewed Applicant and discussed his 
use of marijuana since January 2010, as disclosed on Applicant’s February 2011 e-
QIP.(Item 5.) Applicant said he used marijuana once a month in social settings because 
he liked its relaxing effect. He said he purchased it about every four months. He did not 
consider his use of marijuana to be illegal. He did not know if his employer had a drug 
policy, but thought he was subject to random drug screenings. He has never been 
diagnosed as having a drug problem or undergone drug treatment. He told the 
investigator that he had no intention to use any illegal drug, other than marijuana, in the 
future. His family and friends are aware of his usage. (Item 6.)  
 
 In his response to Interrogatories that he signed on November 15, 2012, 
Applicant wrote that he used marijuana “monthly to bi-monthly,” and said he no longer 
purchased marijuana. (Item 6.) Along with the Interrogatories, he submitted a statement 
verifying that his statements to the investigator in July 2011 were correct. (Item 6.) In his 
handwritten note on the SOR, which was his Answer, Applicant contradicted the content 
of his interview, and claimed that he rarely used marijuana from June 2010 to October 
31, 2012. He asserted the last time he used or purchased marijuana was October 30, 
2012. (Items 1, 4.) He said he would not use it, if his employment required him to stop. 
(Item 6.) 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The Answer is undated. 
2 Applicant wrote on a copy of the SOR (Item 1) and DOHA’s Transmittal Letter (Item 2).  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD CAF3 and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
3 DOHA’s Initial Due Process Adjudication and Reapplication Division was consolidated into the DoD CAF 
during November 2012. 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include:  
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.  
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and may 
be disqualifying. The potentially disqualifying conditions established by the evidence in 
this case are:   
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and  
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant admitted that he used and purchased marijuana illegally from January 
2010 until at least October 30, 2012. The evidence raises trustworthiness concerns 
under the above two disqualifying conditions.  
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting trustworthiness concerns 
under this guideline. AG ¶ 26 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from illegal drug use: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
 clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.   
AG ¶ 25(a) does not apply because Applicant admitted regularly using illegal 
drugs from January 2010 to at least October 30, 2012, during which time he worked for 
a defense contractor. Given the frequency and two-year history of Applicant’s illegal 
drug abuse, his behavior casts doubt on his current trustworthiness and good judgment. 
In his interview, Applicant said he intended to continue using marijuana in the future, 
unless his employment prohibited it. Hence, AG ¶ 25(b) cannot apply. The record does 
not contain evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 25(c). Applicant has not 
participated in substance abuse treatment or received a favorable prognosis by a 
qualified medical professional, which evidence is necessary to apply AG ¶ 25(d).  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 50-year-old married 
man and father of three children, including two teenagers. He illegally used marijuana 
for at least two years, up to October 30, 2012, while employed with a defense 
contractor. His assertion that he will not use marijuana in the future, if prohibited by his 
employer, indicates a lack of appreciation for his duty to avoid illegal activities. He 
provided no independent corroboration from a qualified medical health care professional 
or other individual to support his claims that he does not have a drug problem. His 
rationalization that marijuana is not illegal raises ongoing issues pertinent to his 
reliability, judgment, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from 
his drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
