 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-11344 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns. He has a history of not paying his financial obligations and has 
accumulated over $25,000 in delinquent debt. He also falsified his security clearance 
application by deliberately failing to disclose his negative financial history and that he 
was twice fired in 2009 for job-related misconduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). On January 27, 2013, Applicant 
answered the SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the 
written record. 
 
 On March 14, 2013, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed 
 
2 
 
 
findings of facts, argument, and eight documentary exhibits. Applicant did not object to 
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 8, and they are hereby admitted into evidence.  
 
 On April 26, 2013, Applicant submitted his response to the FORM (Response). 
With his Response, Applicant submitted a copy of his associate’s degree and an 
agreement to rehabilitate his delinquent student loans. These documents were marked 
Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B, and admitted into evidence without objection. On 
May 24, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 54, is twice divorced and has two adult children. He is a security guard 
and has been working for his current employer since April 2011. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 1979 to 1981, and was discharged due to a medical 
condition. He served in the U.S. Army National Guard from 1993 to 2012, at which point 
he retired and received an honorable discharge. (Gx. 4, Gx. 8)  
 
 Applicant’s financial trouble dates back to 2007, when he graduated from school 
and could not find a job paying a sufficient wage to pay his monthly bills and student 
loans. He defaulted on the loans. (Gx. 8, Personal Subject Interview (PSI) at 8-10)  
 
In April 2011, Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA). He 
responded “no” to all questions asking whether he had any negative financial 
information to report. (Gx. 4 at 26-27) In June 2011, Applicant was interviewed as part 
of his background investigation and was asked about his finances. Applicant told the 
investigator that he was aware of his delinquent student loans and some credit cards. 
(Gx. 8, PSI at 8)  
 
Applicant was then confronted by the agent with the negative financial 
information from his credit report, to include three minor delinquent debts for $38, $148, 
and $91 that were all due to one creditor. Applicant promised to resolve these three 
minor debts by July 2011. (Gx. 8, PSI at 11-12) Over a year later, he was sent an 
interrogatory asking for an update regarding his debts, including the three minor debts 
totaling $277. Applicant stated that he had paid the three minor debts, but claimed the 
receipts had not arrived in time prior to submitting his interrogatory response. (Gx. 8) He 
did not submit proof of having satisfied any of his delinquent debts, to include the three 
minor debts for $277, which are listed in SOR ¶ 1.b – 1.d.  
 
With his Response, Applicant submitted a recent agreement to rehabilitate his 
student loans. He did not submit proof of having made any payment per the agreement, 
even though the first payment of $50 was due a month before he submitted his 
Response. (Ax. B, first payment due on “3/28/2013.”)  
 
Applicant’s admissions in his Answer and the credit reports submitted with the 
FORM substantiate the 14 delinquent debts listed in the SOR, which total $27,960. (Gx. 
 
3 
 
 
5 –- 7; Answer) Applicant was alerted to these debts during his background interview in 
June 2011. (Gx. 8, PSI) 
 
Applicant’s financial trouble deepened in 2009, when he was fired from two 
separate jobs as a security guard. He was fired from one job because he was sleeping 
on the job site. He was fired from the second job for insubordination, when he failed to 
report to his security post. On his SCA, which he submitted in connection with his new 
job as a security guard, he only listed being fired from a job in 1997, but not his two job 
terminations in 2009. He told the investigator conducting his background interview that, 
at the time he was fired from the first job, he was informed of the reason he was fired, 
namely, sleeping on the job. He provided no explanation for not disclosing this adverse 
employment information on his SCA. He also told the investigator that he did not list 
being fired from the second job because he felt the termination was without cause. (Gx. 
8, PSI at 4-5) In his Answer, Applicant admits he intentionally falsified his SCA when he 
failed to disclose being fired from both jobs in 2009. 
 
After being fired from his security guard positions in 2009, Applicant was 
unemployed or underemployed until April 2011, when he secured another security 
guard job with his current employer. He did not submit any evidence regarding his 
current job performance. He has not received financial counseling. His recent personal 
financial statement indicates that, before paying on his student loans and other 
delinquent debts, his monthly expenses exceeds his monthly income by about $300. 
(Gx. 8)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
 
4 
 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. Furthermore, “[o]nce a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 
499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s history of not paying his financial 
obligations and accumulation of over $25,000 in delinquent debt raises this concern. 
This evidence also establishes the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19 (a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19 (c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Applicant may mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one 
or more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating 
conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has accumulated over $25,000 
in delinquent debt since 2007. He defaulted on his student loans shortly after he 
received his associate’s degree in 2007, and made no efforts to resolve his delinquent 
student loans until after the SOR was issued. His recent period of unemployment and 
underemployment was partially attributable to his own workplace misconduct, which 
resulted in his terminations in 2009. He submitted no evidence of having resolved any of 
the SOR debts, including the three minor debts for $277 he previously promised to 
satisfy by July 2011. He has not sought financial counseling, his current finances 
indicate that the likelihood of future financial problems is high, and he has been less 
than candid about his finances since the start of his security clearance investigation. In 
short, Applicant’s financial situation continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16, and only the following warrants discussion: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA. An applicant should disclose any potential 
derogatory information. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified his or 
her SCA. Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.1 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his responses to questions on his SCA regarding 
his finances and employment history.2 Applicant’s admission in his Answer to 
deliberately failing to disclose his negative financial history is corroborated by his prior 
statements. Although, due to his poor financial management, Applicant was likely not 
aware of all his delinquent debts, he was well aware, at the time he filled out his SCA, 
that he was delinquent on his student loans and several of his credit cards. He 
deliberately failed to disclose this adverse financial history in response to clear cut 
questions requiring an affirmative response.  
 
 Applicant’s further admissions in his Answer to falsifying his SCA by failing to 
disclose that he had been fired from two jobs as a security guard in 2009 are also 
corroborated by the statements he made during his background interview. Applicant 
specifically told the investigator that he did not list one of the terminations because he 
disagreed with his employer’s determination that he was fired for cause. Applicant’s 
disagreement as to the reason why he was fired from a prior job was not a valid excuse 
for not listing this adverse information on his SCA. Furthermore, he provided no credible 
explanation for why he did not list his other termination for sleeping on the job.3  
 
                                                          
1 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
2 In reaching this conclusion, I considered the Government’s concession that Applicant did not 
falsify his SCA. See FORM at 4-5. However, an administrative judge is not bound by either party’s view of 
the evidence, especially when such view is contradicted by an applicant’s answer and the evidence.  
 
3 ISCR Case No. 10-02330 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Nov. 25, 2011) (once an applicant admits a 
falsification allegation, the burden of persuasion shifts to them). 
 
7 
 
 
 After considering Applicant’s admissions, the evidence, and all reasonable 
inferences, I find that AG ¶ 16(a) applies. Furthermore, after carefully reviewing all the 
mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 17, I find that none apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).4 I specifically considered Applicant’s military service. 
However, after weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate 
the security concerns at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:              Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
