 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-12730 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement), but was able to mitigate security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 25, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 22, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2013,1 and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated March 20, 2013, was provided to him by letter dated 
March 20, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on April 3, 2013. He was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.  
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant timely submitted a response dated April 23, 
2013. By a forwarding memorandum dated May 6, 2013, Department Counsel indicated 
that she did not object to Applicant’s FORM response. The case was assigned to me on 
May 8, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied SOR ¶ 2.a, with explanations. He 
provided an additional explanation and clarification of his SOR answers in his FORM 
response. His admissions and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. I make 
the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old engine mechanic, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since January 2010. He graduated from high school in June 2004. 
(Items 5 and 6.) He has attended college-level courses in 2012 and 2013 in a program 
leading to an associate in science degree in technical management. (FORM response.) 
Applicant’s e-QIP indicates that he has never married and has no dependents. (Item 5.) 
Applicant lives with a significant other and her five-year-old son. (FORM response.) 
 
Drug Involvement/Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force from July 2004 to December 2008, and 
was honorably discharged as an E-4. (Items 5 and 6.) He was granted a secret security 
clearance while in the Air Force. (Items 5 and 9.) In January 2009, he began serving in 
the Air Force Reserve. When Applicant reported for his monthly drill weekend August 
2010, he was informed that he had failed his July 2010 urinalysis as a result of testing 
positive for marijuana, and was placed on inactive status. As of June 2011 when he was 
interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, he was in the 
process of being administratively separated from the Air Force Reserve for failing his 
July 2010 urinalysis. (Item 6.) 
 
Applicant does not dispute his July 2010 urinalysis test results. (Items 6 and 8, 
FORM response.) He subsequently reported his drug test failure to his defense 
                                                          
1
 The date on the first page of Applicant’s SOR answer is February 24, 2013; however, the 
signature page of his SOR answer is dated February 25, 2013. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
contractor employer. (Items 6 and 8, FORM response.) Applicant submitted negative 
test results from a drug test administered on April 6, 2013, by an independent drug lab. 
(FORM response.) 
 
During his June 2011 OPM interview, Applicant denied using any illegal drugs or 
using any illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. (Item 6.) He reiterated those 
denials in his November 2012 response to DOHA interrogatories. (Item 7.) He explained 
in his FORM response: 
 
My intent has not been to interfere with this process. I gave an account of 
an extremely questionable situation and severely underestimated the 
seriousness of the ramifications caused afterwards. I wish to explain why I 
initially labeled this as a “misunderstanding” and not a mistake, which will 
expand on my document dated February 24. On my vacation in 2010, 
there were many parties I went to where alcohol and marijuana were 
available. Numerous occasions there was a “hot box” environment I was 
involved in which may account for positive urinalysis results. With alcohol 
a factor, it is possible I did partake in smoking marijuana and retain no 
memory of it. It is also possible I smoked a cigarette laced with marijuana. 
I did not know all the people at these events nor what they were capable 
of. Please note this event was almost 3 years ago and difficult to recall 
exactly what happened and when. If I was already intoxicated with alcohol, 
it could be difficult to realize marijuana was also effecting (sic) me, thus 
not seizing “hot box” environments. At this time it (is) also worth noting 
that alcoholism is not an issue with me. Like many people, I have a few 
now and then but nothing serious since that vacation. (FORM response.) 
 
I was having a good time with no thought as to what could happen and no 
thought to my foolishness I now clearly see. It was naïve and I clearly now 
see it was a mistake to be in such questionable situations. It was also a 
mistake to not take this case seriously enough. As I did not actually use 
marijuana intentionally, I saw no need to justify my actions. I don’t know if I 
simply thought this would disappear or what, but I should have taken steps 
much sooner to mitigate and/or extenuate this. (FORM response.) 
 
This explanation is consistent with his previous explanation provided in his June 
2011 OPM interview, his SOR answer, and his November 2012 response to DOHA 
interrogatories. (Items 4, 6, and 7.) 
 
Applicant stated that his significant other, with whom he has been living in a 
“spouse-like” relationship since April 2009, occasionally used marijuana while around 
her friend during Applicant’s vacation before his failed urinalysis. (Item 6.) He added 
that his significant other is not involved in illegal drug use and has not possessed or 
used drugs since they have lived together in their current location. Applicant supports 
her and her five-year-old son. (FORM response.) He has not participated in a drug 
treatment program. (Item 6.) 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s work performance evaluations covering the period of January 2001 to 
December 2012 reflect that he is a capable employee, who is making a contribution at 
his work site. (Item 4.) He submitted a reference letter from a senior engine technician, 
who has worked with Applicant over the past three years. His reference described 
Applicant as a “solid and dependable employee with a high degree of integrity and 
quality consciousness.” He further stated that Applicant “has many skills and value to 
bring to an organization.” (FORM response.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”2 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
2
 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 
1994). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the drug involvement security concern: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug[4] or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
                                                          
3 “
The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
4
 AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c).  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;5  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by a duly 
qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), and 25(g) apply. Applicant tested positive for marijuana on a 
urinalysis in July 2010, while holding a security clearance. Applicant does not dispute 
the validity of the urinalysis test, but offers an “unknowing or passive inhalation” 
defense.  
 
Applicant’s explanation of how his July 2010 urinalysis could have tested positive 
for marijuana raises questions about his trustworthiness and good judgment. He offered 
no credible or convincing evidence such as the nanogram level of his test results, 
witness testimony or statements to support his “unknowing or passive inhalation” 
defense, or testimony upon which a credibility assessment could be made. In short, I do 
not accept Applicant’s explanation as credible. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
                                                          
5
 AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) partially apply. Although it has been over two years since 
his urinalysis, the explanations Applicant provided about how he could have tested 
positive lack credibility and substantiation. While Applicant’s motivation to stop using or 
not to use illegal drugs is evident, his explanations of how he could have tested positive 
while holding a security clearance undercut receiving full mitigation. None of the other 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes five conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(a) through 16(d) do not apply. As indicated under the drug involvement 
guideline, there is credible adverse information that is sufficient for an adverse 
determination under Guideline H. However, AG ¶ 16(e)(1) applies because his drug 
abuse while holding a security clearance creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, and such conduct adversely affects Applicant’s professional 
standing. There is substantial evidence of this disqualifying condition, and further inquiry 
about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶¶ 17(a) through 17(d), and 17(f) do not apply. No falsification or failure to 
cooperate in the security clearance application process was alleged, although 
Applicant’s credibility has come into question as a result of his explanations for testing 
positive for marijuana. 
  
AG ¶ 17(e) applies and mitigates concerns under AG ¶ 16(e)(1). Applicant 
disclosed his drug abuse to his employer, which is a positive step to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Federal security officials are well 
aware of his history of drug abuse. It is unlikely that anyone could use Applicant’s 
history of drug abuse to coerce him into compromising classified information.   
 
AG ¶ 15 indicates that poor judgment can cause reliability and trustworthiness 
concerns, resulting in disqualification under the personal conduct guideline. Judgment 
issues under the personal conduct guideline are more specifically addressed in this 
case under the drug involvement guideline. I find for Applicant under Guideline E 
because those judgment issues are a duplication of the judgment concerns previously 
discussed under Guideline H. 
 
 
  
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the “whole-person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis.  Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although there is insufficient whole-person evidence to support reinstatement of 
Applicant’s clearance and access to sensitive information at this time, he presented 
some positive whole-person evidence.  
 
Applicant honorably served in the Air Force from July 2004 to December 2008. 
The only evidence of drug involvement is Applicant’s one-time urinalysis failure. 
Applicant states that he does not use drugs nor does he associate with drug users. He 
provided evidence of a negative drug test administered as recently as April 2013. 
Applicant has a stable job and a stable home life. He supports his significant other and 
her five-year-old son. Applicant is working towards earning an associate’s degree. His 
work performance evaluations and his work-related reference are positive. 
 
However, Applicant’s use of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance is a 
significant breach of trust. His “unknowing or passive inhalation” defense and various 
theories on how he could have tested positive appear as attempts to undermine the 
process. His use of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance indicates a lack of 
judgment, and raises unresolved questions about his reliability and trustworthiness. 
Personal conduct concerns are mitigated as a duplication of the drug involvement 
concerns. Drug involvement concerns are not mitigated. 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 12968, the Directive, the Regulation, the AGs, and other 
cited references to the facts and circumstances of this case in the context of the whole 
person. For the reasons stated, I conclude Appellant is not eligible for access to 
classified information and assignment to a sensitive position.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
