 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-11142 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 29, 2011. On 
January 14, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 5, 2013; answered it on February 22, 
2013; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on March 19, 2013, and the case was assigned to an 
administrative judge on March 28, 2013. Scheduling of the hearing was delayed by 
budget constraints and the unavailability of video teleconference equipment in the area 
 
2 
 
where Applicant lives and works. The case was reassigned to me on May 8, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 14, 
2013, scheduling the hearing for June 3, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified but did not present any documentary evidence or witnesses. I kept 
the record open until June 17, 2013, to enable him to present documentary evidence. 
He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX A through C are attached to 
the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the electronic version of the transcript 
(Tr.) on June 15, 2013, and the hard copy on June 20, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations except SOR ¶ 
1.y, which he neither denied nor admitted. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old machinist employed by a defense contractor. He 
graduated from high school in June 1999, and he began working for his current 
employer in September 1999. He received a security clearance in June 2000. He 
completed a four-year apprenticeship in January 2004.  
 
 Applicant married in December 2002. He and his wife have two children, ages 9, 
and 8. His wife has a son, age 13, from a previous relationship. Applicant has treated 
this child as his own from the beginning of their marriage. (GX 2 at 18.) 
 
 Applicant worked a night shift for seven years, and he accepted an opportunity to 
work the day shift in August 2012. He gave up the night-pay differential of about $3,000 
per year because the night shift was physically exhausting and interfered with his family 
life. (Tr. 27.) 
 
 The $6,309 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was for martial arts lessons for Applicant’s 
children. The creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant in September 2010. (GX 5 
at 1.) Applicant testified that, in September 2012, he agreed to make payments of $20 
per two-week pay period for three months, and in December 2012 he increased his 
payments to $30 per pay period. (GX 2 at 20; Tr. 40-44.) After the hearing, he submitted 
a spreadsheet listing this debt and a copy of a debit card account statement dated June 
11, 2013, reflecting a $53 payment to this creditor. (AX B; AX C.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant stated that the collection 
account for a $59 bill for satellite television service alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and a collection 
account for a $58 bill for satellite television service alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i were the same 
debt. The debt was referred for collection in November 2008. (GX 5 at 2.) Applicant 
testified that he thought he paid the bill about seven years ago by using a debit card, but 
he was unable to produce any documentation of a payment. (Tr. 37-38.) 
 
 
3 
 
 In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant also claimed that the 
collection account for a $415 cell phone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t and a collection 
account for a $1,446 cell phone bill from the same provider, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.dd, are 
the same debt. Even though the amounts are different, he believes that he had only one 
account with this cell phone service provider. The debt was referred for collection in 
April 2011. (GX 3 at 12.) Applicant testified that he contacted this creditor in June or 
July 2012 and received a settlement offer, but he had no further contact with the creditor 
after receiving the offer. (Tr. 38-40.) 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.cc arose in 2003, when Applicant borrowed $22,000 
to purchase a vehicle. He was unable to make the payments, and the vehicle was 
repossessed in April 2004. The $11,000 deficiency after the vehicle was sold was 
referred for collection in May 2004. (GX 2 at 33.) Applicant testified that, about two 
weeks before the hearing, the collection agency for the lender contacted him and 
offered to accept $25 per pay period until he can afford to pay more. He also testified 
that the debt has risen to about $19,000 because of accrued interest, but that the 
creditor agreed to settle the debt for $10,000. Applicant was unable to produce 
documentation of the payment agreement by the time the record closed. (Tr. 45-47.) 
After the hearing, he submitted a bank statement reflecting two $25 payments. (AX B.) 
 
 Thirteen of the 30 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are medical debts (SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.e-1.h, 1.j-1.o, 1.w, and 1.z). The amounts range from $29 to $614. One debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.o) was referred for collection in 2006; three (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.m, and 1.n) were 
referred for collection in 2007; three (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.k, 1.h were referred for collection in 
2008; one (SOR ¶ 1.j) was referred for collection in 2009; and five (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 
1.w, and 1.z) were referred for collection in 2010. (GX 3; GX 4; GX 5.) Applicant testified 
that he has medical insurance, but the debts are for copayments, shots, and other items 
not covered by his insurance. (Tr. 30-32.) He testified that his wife had breast reduction 
surgery several years ago, but he did not know if any of the delinquent medical debts 
alleged in the SOR pertained to her surgery. (Tr. 34.) He testified that he obtained a 
copy of his credit report after he was interviewed by a security investigator in June 
2011, but he did not do any significant investigation of the delinquent medical accounts 
listed in his credit report. (Tr. 35-37.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he talked with a credit counseling agency around 2005, 
but they could not help him because he had too much delinquent debt. (Tr. 52-53.) In 
his October 2012 response to financial interrogatories, he submitted a personal financial 
statement reflecting net monthly income of $2,903, expenses of $2,897, the biweekly 
payments to the martial arts school alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and a net remainder of $6.68. 
(GX 2 at 26.) He received a federal income tax refund of about $3,000 and a state tax 
refund of about $100, which he used to pay current expenses, make a payment on the 
delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and pay some of his smaller delinquent debts. 
(Tr. 53-56.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife worked as a teacher’s assistant from 2000 until June 2012. Her 
net take-home pay was about $1,100 per month. She stopped working outside the 
 
4 
 
home because their youngest child has attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
and was having behavioral problems at school. She is now home-schooling him. (Tr. 
30-31.) Applicant’s credit reports reflect that all the debts alleged in the SOR had been 
reduced to judgment or referred for collection at least a year before Applicant’s wife was 
unable to continue working outside the home. (GX 3; GX 4; GX 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant contended and Department Counsel conceded that the same debt was 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i. Applicant also contended that the same debt was alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.t and 1.dd, and Department Counsel disagreed, pointing out that the 
amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t was $415 but the amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.dd was 
$1,446. I found Applicant’s testimony that he had only one account with this creditor 
plausible and credible, and I conclude that the smaller debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t is 
included in the larger debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.dd. When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I will resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.t in Applicant’s 
favor. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are ongoing, numerous, and did 
not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s pay reduction due to a transfer to the 
day shift was voluntary and not a condition beyond his control. His son’s ADHD and the 
loss of his wife’s income to meet their son’s needs were conditions beyond his control. 
However, all the debts alleged in the SOR had become delinquent and were referred for 
collection or reduced to judgment at least a year before Applicant’s wife left her job to 
take care of their son. Furthermore, Applicant has not acted responsibly. His first 
affirmative steps to resolve any of the delinquent debts in the SOR was in September 
2012, when he negotiated a payment agreement with the martial arts school. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Although Applicant may have consulted with a 
financial advisor or debt management service in the past, his financial problems are not 
under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) requires a showing of good faith. Good faith within the meaning of 
this mitigating condition means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
 
7 
 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A person is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a 
plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR 
be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). I conclude 
that this mitigating condition is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, because 
Applicant presented documentary proof of his payment agreement and a track record of 
compliance with his payment agreement. It is not established for the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.cc, because his two recent $25 payments on a $10,000 delinquent debt are 
insufficient to show that he is likely to carry out his agreement. It is not established for 
the remaining debts in the SOR, because Applicant does not have a coherent plan for 
addressing these delinquent debts, nor has he taken significant steps to resolve them. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR, except to point out that two debts were duplicates. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer for almost 14 years and held a 
security clearance for most of that time. His son’s ADHD has placed an additional 
burden on his financial situation. He is devoted to his family. However, he does not have 
a good grasp on his financial situation and no coherent plan for attaining financial 
stability.  
 
8 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.u-1.dd:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
