1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-14201
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 18, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge:
The Statement of Reasons (SOR) identified Applicant as owing two delinquent
debts totaling $31,628. Applicant’s financial problems happened so long ago, were
limited to two emergency medical debts, and occurred under circumstances that are
unlikely to recur. He has now negotiated resolution of those debts. They do not cast
doubt on his current judgment. Based on a review of the testimony, pleadings, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on July 28, 2011. On February 20, 2013, the Department of Defense issued an
SOR to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on March 14, 2013, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on April 11, 2013. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on April 11, 2013, scheduling the hearing for May 13, 2013. The
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through
7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The
record was left open until June 14, 2013, for the receipt of documentation from
Applicant. On June 11, 2013, Applicant presented five additional documents, marked
AE A through AE F. Department Counsel had no objections and they were admitted into
evidence as identified. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 21,
2013.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old government contractor. He has worked for his current
employer since June 2011. He is single and has no children. (GE 1; Tr. 23, 25-26.)
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR
identified two delinquent debts totaling $31,628. Applicant admitted both of the debts,
as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, in his Answer.  
Applicant attributes his two delinquent debts to medical bills associated with an
emergency appendectomy that occurred when he was 24 years old. Applicant did not
have medical insurance at the time, but was told he would be covered by a state
program that helped low-income earners afford medical care. A year after the surgery,
he received the two bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He learned that an error had
been made in the state benefits paperwork, and that the time to refile a claim with the
state had lapsed. Applicant was unable to afford to pay these debts. He was young and
inexperienced with how to manage debt, as he had never had a delinquency before. He
contacted the hospital and was told that the account had been forwarded to collections.
He contacted the collection agent but was unable to reach a negotiated settlement. (GE
1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 23-45.)
In May 2013 Applicant called the credit agency and negotiated a settlement for
$11,058 for both debts. He testified he is in the process of applying for a loan to cover
this negotiated settlement amount. His loan payments will be $150 per month, an
amount which testified he can afford. (Tr. 35-38; AE F.)
Prior to his medical emergency, Applicant was current on all of his bills. He is
currently in good standing with all of his other financial accounts, as reflected on his
May 13, 2013 credit report. Applicant now maintains medical insurance. (GE 7; Tr. 23-
24, 29, 43.)
3
Applicant is well respected by those who know him. His previous employer of
twelve years indicated, “He was the best employee I ever had and the most
trustworthy.” Applicant’s sister indicated that, since the passing of their father in 2012,
Applicant has stepped up and taken responsibility for their household, to include paying
their bills. A former teacher wrote that Applicant “is an honest individual who recognizes
hard work as the path toward achieving his long term goals.” (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D;
AE E.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
4
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant accumulated two delinquent debts totaling $31,628. The evidence
supports the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant
to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. Three are applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
1See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
5
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a
process designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.1
Applicant incurred his debts as a result of an emergency medical procedure that took
place seven years ago. He was young and inexperienced with debt at that time. He
came from modest means and did not have medical insurance. He qualified for state
assistance on his medical bills, but due to an error in the paperwork, these two debts
were not paid by the state. Applicant was unaware of the error until after the time he
could re-file the claim had lapsed. He was left with two medical bills that he simply could
not afford to pay on his limited income. He contacted the collection agent at the time,
but was unable to negotiate a settlement agreement that he could afford to comply with,
and was not knowledgeable about other possible debt management solutions. Applicant
now maintains medical insurance. He understands the importance of satisfying his
delinquencies, and he has negotiated with his creditors. He plans on satisfying the
debts as soon as he is able to secure the loan. Applicant’s financial problems happened
so long ago, were limited to two debts, and occurred under circumstances that are
unlikely to recur. Further, he  otherwise, and now, pays all of his bills on time, as
reflected by his most recent credit report. His delinquent medical accounts do not cast
doubt on his  current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was honest and
6
candid about his finances. He was young at the time he defaulted on his medical
accounts and his inexperience left him feeling he had no other option than to default on
his obligations. He is older and wiser now. An applicant is not required to establish that
he has paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant
establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant action to
implement the plan. Applicant has applied for an affordable loan that he intends to use
to settle the two debts listed on the SOR, thereby demonstrating the significant action.
He has sufficient income to avoid financial problems in the future. His finances do not
constitute a security concern.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
JENNIFER I. GOLDSTEIN
Administrative Judge
