 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00639 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
The evidence is insufficient to establish that Applicant had a judgment filed 
against him in March 2010, or that he owes $17,000. He did not deliberately falsify his 
security clearance application (SCA). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his SCA on August 5, 2010. On December 3, 2012, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 7, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on February 8, 2013. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 25, 2013, 
scheduling a hearing for April 18, 2013. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through four. AE 4 
was received post-hearing. All exhibits were received without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 26, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to correct a 
typographical error. She moved to delete from the second line of the allegation the 
figure “2012,” and substitute therein “2010.” Applicant did not object, and I granted the 
motion as requested. (Tr. 13-14) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the two SOR allegations under ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a. After a thorough 
review of all the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make 
the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old mail clerk employed with a government contractor. 
After graduating from high school, he attended college and accumulated approximately 
36 college credits. He has never been married, and has no children. He has been living 
with his mother since 2004. He explained that he moved out on his own for a short 
period, but returned to live with his mother to save money and be able to handle his 
financial situation.  
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer, a government contractor, in August 
2008. He claimed he has held access to classified information at the secret level from 
2008 to present. There is no evidence to show that he has compromised or caused 
others to compromise classified information. Outside of the security concerns alleged in 
the current SOR, there is no evidence that Applicant had any other security issues of 
concern.  
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s August 2010 SCA, asked him to 
disclose whether in the last seven years he had any financial problems. He answered 
“No” to all the financial questions. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant has an unpaid 
$17,000 judgment filed against him on March 29, 2010. SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that he 
deliberately failed to disclose the March 2010 judgment in his August 2010 SCA. 
 
A 2010 credit report (GE 5) provides prima facie evidence that a judgment was 
filed against Applicant in March 2010. Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigator in September 2010. During the interview, he was asked whether he had any 
delinquent debts or judgments filed against him. Apparently, Applicant disclosed the 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and a $600 delinquent credit card account, which had 
been delinquent for over four years (not alleged in the SOR). (GE 2) He also disclosed 
 
3 
 
 
periods of unemployment while in high school (2000-2004), from June 2006 until 
February 2007, and from May 2008 until August 2008. Applicant’s current net monthly 
income, after paying monthly expenses, is $1,047. 
 
Concerning the March 2010 judgment, Applicant explained that in 2009, he and 
his mother were sharing a car. Applicant’s mother owns and insured the car. He drove 
the car with a suspended driver’s license because he had failed to pay a traffic ticket. 
He was involved in an accident and his mother’s insurance company refused to provide 
coverage. The other party’s insurance company filed suit against Applicant’s mother. 
Applicant and his mother were aware of the suit, consulted with counsel, but did not 
appear in court because they were told that they would lose the lawsuit. The court found 
his mother liable and granted a $17,000 judgment against her.  
 
Regarding his failure to disclose the judgment in his August 2010 SCA, Applicant 
credibly testified that he did not know that he was included in the judgment. He believed 
that only his mother was named in the judgment. I note that the court records and 
correspondence documents admitted into evidence indicate Applicant’s mother as the 
sole defendant in the lawsuit, and as the subject of the collection action. (GEs 2, 3, and 
AE 1-4) None of the documents refer to Applicant as being part of the lawsuit or the 
collection action. I also note that the September 2012 credit report (GE 4) does not 
reflect a judgment filed against Applicant. Additionally, all payments made to the 
insurance company have been made by Applicant’s mother. 
 
Although the 2010 credit report establishes prima facie the filing of a judgment 
against Applicant in March 2010, the more specific documents - the court records and 
correspondence documents - rebut the 2010 credit report. Considering the evidence as 
a whole, I find that the evidence is insufficient to establish that a judgment was filed 
against Applicant in March 2010.  
 
I considered Applicant’s statement to the investigator, his answer to the DOHA 
interrogatories, and his testimony wherein he admitted owing $17,000 to the insurance 
company and having a judgment filed against him. Notwithstanding, the most reliable 
evidence - the court and correspondence documents - show that the lawsuit and 
judgment were filed against Applicant’s mother. He was not named as a party to either 
action. Applicant may believe that he is financially responsible to his mother and the 
insurance company for the accident, and he may be giving his mother the money to 
make the payments; nevertheless, the evidence does not establish his financial liability.  
 
Applicant’s only delinquent debt is a credit card account, owing $600, which he 
opened when he was in college. This debt was not alleged in in the SOR. Applicant 
acknowledged that the credit card was delinquent because of his lack of financial 
responsibility. Apparently, he stopped paying it during a period of unemployment, but 
should have started paying it when he became employed. He forgot about it with the 
passage of time. He testified that he now has the financial means to pay it and that he 
intends to pay it in the near future. Applicant failed to disclose his delinquent credit card 
debt in his August 2010 SCA. (Tr. 45-46) 
 
4 
 
 
Concerning his failure to disclose the credit card delinquent debt in his SCA, 
Applicant explained that it had been so long since the account became delinquent that 
he forgot about it. Applicant averred he had no intention to mislead or falsify his security 
clearance application. He noted that he was candid and forthcoming during his 
September 2010 background interview and discussed both debts with the investigator.  
 
Except for the judgment and the credit card debt, the admitted credit reports 
show a history of financial stability, and that he has been living within his financial 
means. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for driving with a suspended driver’s 
license, and for not being more diligent paying the judgment and the credit card debt. 
He likes his job and would not like to lose it. He promised to continue making payments 
on the judgment and to pay off the credit card debt. Applicant considers himself to be 
honest, trustworthy, and a dedicated employee. He is punctual and a good worker. He 
needs his security clearance to retain his job, and the ability to pay his debts. Applicant 
presented no evidence to show he has participated in financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
 
5 
 
 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
The available evidence failed to establish that a $17,000 judgment was filed 
against Applicant in March 2010. Even considering the not alleged delinquent credit 
card account, the evidence does not show Applicant has a financial problem. None of 
the financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 Applicant promised to pay his credit card debt as soon as possible. His credit 
reports show a history of financial stability. Applicant likes his job and would like to 
continue working for his employer. I have no questions about Applicant’s current 
financial situation and his ability and willingness to resolve his debt. On balance, the 
available evidence is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns regarding Applicant’s 
financial responsibility. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The SOR alleges Applicant falsified his August 2010 SCA when he failed to 
disclose that a judgment was filed against him in March 2010. In light of the court and 
correspondence documents, Applicant’s mother was the only party to the lawsuit and 
 
6 
 
 
collection action. The evidence is insufficient to show Applicant had a judgment filed 
against him in 2010.  
 
  Applicant should have disclosed his delinquent credit card debt, and I have 
considered this fact in assessing his credibility and his case in mitigation. Applicant was 
candid and forthcoming discussing this debt during his September 2010 interview and at 
his hearing. Considering the record as a whole, I believe Applicant made an honest 
mistake and did not remember the four-year-old credit card debt. Applicant promised to 
contact the creditor and start paying the debt. In light of the above findings, I find for 
Applicant on the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c))  
 
Applicant, 28, has worked as a mail clerk for a government contractor while 
possessing a security clearance since 2008. He considers himself to be a good, 
productive employee. Except for the current security concerns, there is no evidence of 
any problems or concerns while he possessed a security clearance. He demonstrated 
bad judgment by driving with a suspended driving license and getting involved in an 
accident.  
 
As a result of the security clearance process, Applicant is now fully aware that he 
is required to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance and 
to keep his job. Applicant promised to make timely payments in the future to resolve his 
debts. Considering the record as a whole, Applicant is in control of his financial situation 
and has no financial problems.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
