 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09692 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor providing interpreter 
services in Afghanistan. He has six outstanding debts that became delinquent between 
2003 and 2010. He failed to establish financial responsibility in the handling of his debts. 
Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 6, 2010. On 
September 18, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on December 12, 2012, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 24, 2013, was 
provided to him by transmittal letter dated March 25, 2013. Applicant received the 
FORM on April 3, 2013. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM 
and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. His response was due on May 3, 
2013. As of May 23, 2013, he had not responded to the FORM. The case was assigned 
to me on May 24, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the factual allegations in the SOR. After a thorough review of 
the evidence of record, including his SCA, answers to the SOR, two screening 
questionnaires, and three credit bureau reports, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old interpreter employed by a defense contractor. He was 
born in Afghanistan, and immigrated to the United States in 1986. He married his wife in 
Pakistan in 1989, and he has two children, ages 19 and 17. He became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in July 1992. 
 
Applicant’s work history indicates he was a salesman at a food store from March 
1999 to March 2002. He purchased a store in March 2003, and worked full-time in his 
store until March 2010. Applicant claimed that his financial problems started in 2007, as 
a result of the downturn of his business and the U.S. economy. In March 2010, 
Applicant sought employment with his current employer, a government contractor. He 
provides interpreter services to U.S. personnel deployed to Afghanistan. This is his first 
security clearance application. Apparently, he has been deployed to Afghanistan during 
some periods between 2010 and the present.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his April 2010 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) that he 
had financial problems, which included foreclosed real estate properties. The 
background investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed the six 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. The SOR debts are established by the credit 
reports submitted by the Government and Applicant’s prior statements.  
 
In 2003, Applicant purchased four real estate properties. While the U.S. economy 
was doing well, he was able to pay the mortgages using the rental income. When the 
U.S. economy took a downturn in 2007, Applicant’s tenants were not able to keep their 
jobs or pay the rent, and Applicant’s properties were foreclosed.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($19,005) and 1.b 
($21,328) resulted from two unpaid mortgages for homes he purchased, presumably in 
2003, that were foreclosed. He claimed he lost the down payments that he made on 
both properties of $45,000 and $65,000, respectively. In his answers to screening 
questionnaires from April 2010 and April 2012, Applicant indicated that he had no 
intention to pay the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b, in 2010, he 
indicated he had no intention to pay this debt. In 2012, he claimed he had paid this debt. 
Applicant provided no documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
3 
 
 
The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c ($8,589) concerns a credit card 
Applicant used for his store. In 2010, he apparently rented his business for a period of 
three years. In his 2010 questionnaire, Applicant stated he would pay this debt when he 
had the money. In his 2012 questionnaire, Applicant stated he had not paid this debt 
and that he has no intention to pay it. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d ($2,588) concerns an apartment lease Applicant co-signed for one of 
his employees. The employee moved away and did not honor the rental contract. The 
landlord attempted to collect from Applicant. In 2010, Applicant stated the debt was 
unpaid and that he did not intend to pay it. In 2012, Applicant stated that the debt was 
paid. He presented no documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
Applicant acknowledged the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e ($245) in 
2010. He terminated early a wireless service contract and was assessed an early 
termination fee. He disagreed with the fee, and refused to pay it. Applicant claimed he 
paid the debt when it was forwarded for collection. He presented no documentary 
evidence to support his claim. Applicant also claimed that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f 
($199) is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Based on credit reports 
submitted, he failed to present sufficient evidence to establish that these debts are 
duplicated.  
 
Applicant’s March 2010 personal financial statement (PFS) indicated he had 
$7,700 net monthly income; $2,350 of monthly expenses; and $5,306 of monthly debt 
payments; with a net remainder of $50. Applicant’s April 2012 PFS indicated a monthly 
net income of $12,978; with monthly expenses of $8,008; for a net remainder of $4,970.  
 
Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to show that he maintained 
contact with his creditors, established payment plans, or disputed any of the SOR debts. 
He presented no evidence to show he has received financial counseling. Applicant 
receives credit for seeking a higher-paying job with a government contractor. However, 
he failed to present any evidence to show that he used his higher earnings to pay any of 
his outstanding delinquent debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
 
4 
 
 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The evidence established the six delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
over $51,900, that became delinquent between 2003 and 2010. Financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant has been fully employed with a government contractor since March 
2010, and earns over $150,000 a year. He presented no evidence of any debt 
payments, contacts with creditors, disputes, or that he otherwise attempted to resolve 
his debts. Additionally, I have questions about Applicant’s judgment in purchasing four 
real estate properties in 2003 on a $2,800 salary, all of which were foreclosed. 
Applicant’s lack of financial responsibility shows he is not aware of what is required of 
him to establish eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, 
and he still owes a large debt. I considered that the debts became delinquent, in part, 
because of the downturn of the U.S. economy, a circumstance beyond his control. 
Notwithstanding, he presented no evidence to show financial responsibility with respect 
to any of the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence that he received financial counseling. In light of 
all available evidence, Applicant’s unresolved debts cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor providing interpreter 
services in Afghanistan since 2010. He has six outstanding debts that became 
delinquent between 2003 and 2010. He failed to establish financial responsibility in the 
handling of his financial obligations. He is not aware of what is required of him to be 
eligible for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
