KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C
DIGEST: Applicant’s initial statement to an investigator in which he professed greater allegiance
to Afghanistan than the United States and his relationship with his elderly brother living in
Afghanistan support the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance determination.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-09446.a1
DATE: 06/14/2013
DATE:   June 14, 2013
In Re:
---------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-09446
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
---------------------------, Personal Representative
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 9, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On February 15, 2013, after the
close of the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari
Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 70 years old.  He was born in Afghanistan and attended high
school and a university there.  He served in the Afghan army for one year.  He worked for an Afghan
governmental agency for a number of years.  He left Afghanistan and resided in Pakistan for a few
years until he came to the United States in 1992.  He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001.  He
has a U.S. passport.  Applicant has two brothers and one sister.  One brother remains a citizen and
resident of Afghanistan.  Applicant communicates with him yearly.
An investigator interviewed Applicant regarding information on his security clearance
application.  He asked Applicant, “Is there any country that you feel more loyal to or like more than
the U.S.?”  In response, Applicant said, “Oh no I like MY [sic] country Afghanistan.  I would say
Afghanistan and then United States.”  In his response to the government’s documentary evidence,
Applicant wrote that “I admit that I love U.S.A., my second country more than Afghanistan.”
Applicant told the investigator that he wants to return to Afghanistan “to help improve Afghanistan,
second to support HIMSELF [sic] and third help the U.S. Mission.”  Applicant also told the
investigator that he was very home sick for Afghanistan.  
At this time, the risk of terrorist activities in Afghanistan remains extremely high.  The
country’s human rights record remains poor and violence is rampant.  Insurgents continue to plan
attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals.  The United States’
extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing
conflict in Afghanistan to citizens and residents of Afghanistan and Afghan Government problems
developing and complying with the rule of law.
The Judge concluded: Under Guideline B, Applicant’s relationship with his elderly brother
living in Afghanistan creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is sufficiently
close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist a family member in Afghanistan by
providing sensitive or classified information.  Applicant has failed to provide sufficient evidence to
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that his relationships with his relatives
who are Afghanistan citizens could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  Applicant
failed to present sufficient credible evidence to demonstrate that “he has enough loyalties to this
country” to mitigate the presence of his brother in Afghanistan and to outweigh his feelings of
sympathy and connections to his place of birth.  Under Guideline C, Applicant’s initial statement
to the investigator in which he professed greater allegiance to Afghanistan than the United States
is not controverted by his subsequent written statement in his response to the government’s
evidence.  No mitigating conditions are sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised under this
guideline.  The record evidence does not outweigh Applicant’s assertions of strong allegiance to
Afghanistan.
     On appeal, Applicant argues that he loves the United States, and has loved it since his first day
here.  He asserts that his loyalty and love is only for the United States, and that the unfavorable
security clearance decision is unfair.  He professes a desire to continue serving the United States.
The Board interprets these arguments as an assertion that the Judge’s findings and conclusions as
to Applicant’s preference for Afghanistan are not supported by the record.  We have examined the
Judge’s Decision in light of the record and find no reason to believe that she weighed the evidence
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  We conclude that the Judge’s material
findings of security concern are supported by substantial record evidence.  Applicant has not
demonstrated that the Judge’s findings contain any harmful error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-
08844 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2013).  Moreover, Applicant does not challenge the Judge’s
unfavorable findings and conclusions under Guideline B.   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
