1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-07214
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jon L. Roberts, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On October 12, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO)
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September
1, 2006. 
Applicant responded on December 10, 2012, and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was
assigned the case on January 16, 2013. The parties proposed a hearing date of
February 7, 2013. A notice setting the hearing for that date was issued on January 25,
2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and offered 13 documents, which were
accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) A through M. Department
Counsel offered five documents, which were admitted as exhibits (Exs.) 1-5 without
objection. On February 15, 2013, the transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received
 Tr. 147. Adderall is a prescribed amphetam ine and dextroamphetamine medication used to address      1
Applicant’s attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Applicant repeatedly stated that references in the
record that he used Adderall to get a “high” are incorrect and may have been due to his own error in reporting.
 Tr. 125.      2
 Tr. 127.      3
2
and the record closed. Based on a thorough review of the testimony, submissions, and
exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden of mitigating the security concerns
raised in the SOR. Clearance is denied. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old engineer who has worked in the same position for the
same defense contractor for the past two years. He has a bachelor’s degree in
computer science. Applicant is married and has two children. 
In May 1978, Applicant graduated from high school. He joined the United States
Navy in order to mature and see the world. He received his first security clearance at
age 18 and he served as an operations specialist. He was honorably discharged in
1982, at which point he began college. Applicant graduated with a 3.2 grade point
average in 1986, then accepted a position with a defense contractor, where he was
again granted a security clearance. He continued to work in both the defense and
commercial industries through the 1990s. Today, he works in the defense industry. He
has maintained his current security clearance since first working for his present
employer in 2004.
From about February 2008 through February 2011, Applicant took his wife’s
prescription pain medication on at least six to eight occasions. He did so without her
knowledge. On one or two occasions he used her drugs for pain caused by shoveling
snow. The rest of the time he used them with alcohol to achieve a relaxing “high.” In
addition, from some time in 2010 through July 2011, he took additional Adderall above
his prescribed dosage in order to help him stay focused.1
On July 12, 2010, and on March 7, 2011, Applicant certified his answers on two
separate security clearance applications (SCA). Section 23, Illegal Use of Drugs or
Drug Involvement on both SCAs inquired about various types of drug use in the
preceding seven years, including substances ranging from cocaine and marijuana to
the illegal use of stimulants and prescription drugs (including painkillers). When reading
the question on both SCAs, he got as far as the references to cocaine and marijuana,
then directly answered “no” because he did not use illegal drugs. He then moved on to
the next question. He did not foresee that the question inquired about the abuse of
prescription drugs.  Therefore, Applicant did not note his abuse of his wife’s pain2
medications and his abuse of Adderall. Sharing of prescription medication between
spouses or manipulating one’s own prescription dosages did not occur to him to be an
issue of drug abuse.3
 Tr.128.      4
 Tr. 134-135.      5
 Tr. 140-142.      6
 Tr. 143-145. Applicant later testified that he was not as clear as he should have been. He apparently did      7
explain to the investigator that he did not have a prescription for a pain medication he had used such drugs.
Tr. 145.
3
In December 2010, Applicant’s service with his current employer was curtailed
due to a round of layoffs. He interviewed at another defense contractor, where he was
given a polygraph test in July 2011. During the polygraph, questions were asked about
the use of illegal drugs.  Applicant initially failed to disclose his abuse of both his wife’s4
pain medication and his Adderall for the same reason he failed to disclose it on his
SCAs. He was then told that he failed the polygraph test due to his responses regarding
drugs. Discussion ensured, and Applicant disclosed his prescription drug abuse.  When
he got home, he discussed the issue with his wife. To safeguard that he did not have a
drug problem, he immediately contacted a counselor, who he continues to see with
varying frequency now for stress. The counselor has helped Applicant cope with
adverse situations and tensions. He also convinced Applicant that he did not have a
drug abuse problem.5
In the interim, when interviewed in May 2012, Applicant attributed his abuse of
his wife’s prescription drugs to back pain related to snow removal. He failed to also
disclose he used it at times with alcohol to relax and escape from stressors such as
marital strife, professional worries, his farther’s ill health, and generalized anxieties.  He6
did not share his new found understanding regarding the security concerns raised by
prescription drug abuse with the investigator. Applicant admits that he “wasn’t telling the
whole truth” and was “less than forthcoming” or “obfuscating” with regard to drugs
during the interview.  7
In his free time, Applicant is active with his church, where he volunteers with
sound and video effects and with its men’s group. He is well-respected by his church
community. At work, Applicant is highly regarded. He keeps up-to-date with security and
awareness training sessions, as well as a number of training seminars related to his
area of expertise. Applicant is highly embarrassed by his abuse of medications and
highly contrite. He is equally contrite that he was not more forthcoming.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      9
 Id.      10
 Id.      11
4
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel....”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance8
of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  9
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access
to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard indicates that
security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any10
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive information.11
Analysis
Guideline H – Drug Involvement
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
 AG  ¶ 24.      12
 Id. at ¶ 24(a)(1-2).      13
 Id. at  ¶ 24(b).      14
5
rules, and regulations.  “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior altering substances,12
and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and inhalants and other
substances.  “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a13
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.  14
Applicant admitted he used his wife’s prescription pain medication on multiple
occasions between February 2008 and February 2011. Sometimes he used her
medications for genuine pain, at other times it was to seek relaxation or relieve stress.
He also admitted that he manipulated the dosage of Adderal he consumed about twice
a week between 2010 and July 2011. Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶
25(a) (any drug abuse), and AG ¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a
security clearance) apply. With disqualifying conditions raised, the burden shifts to
Applicant to mitigate related security concerns.
In offering his testimony, Applicant was highly credible when stating that he was
unaware that there was a prohibition against using his spouse’s medications or
increasing the dosage of his own prescription medication. Given his age and the
increase in drug monitoring and control in recent years, his statement is quite plausible.
He now understands these matters. Moreover, he sought and has received counseling
to help him better cope with stress and to help him relax. It is unlikely he will again
abuse another’s or his own prescription medication. Drug Involvement Mitigating
Condition AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. 
Applicant has not used his wife’s medications since February 2011, nearly two-
and-a-half years ago. He has not self-adjusted the dosages on his own prescription
medication since July 2011, two years ago. There is no indication that he became
dependent on either of these medications or that he has had difficulty foregoing their
use.  In light of the brief period of abuse and the limited number of instances involved in
abusing his wife’s prescribed pain medication, I find AG ¶ 26(b)(3) (an appropriate
period of abstinence) applies. In sum, given the mitigating conditions raised, I find
Applicant mitigated drug involvement security concerns.
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
 AG ¶ 15.      15
 Id.      16
6
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  In addition, any failure to15
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process is of special interest.  16
In July 2010 and in March 2011, Applicant failed to disclose the fact he had
abused his wife’s pain medication on multiple occasions between February 2008 and
February 2011, and that he had manipulated the dosage of his Adderall prescription on
multiple occasions between 2010 and July 2011. He failed to disclose that same
information during a July 2011 polygraph examination. Finally, in May 2012, he failed to
explicitly disclose this drug abuse in an interview. If these failures were deliberate or
meant to mislead or obfuscate relevant facts during the investigative process, Personal
Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) and AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer,
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government
representative) would apply.
Applicant has maintained a security clearance for the better part of his adult life,
having received his first clearance in the military at age 18. It is nearly inconceivable
that a 52 year old man with that background would not be aware that the SCAs are
amended from time to time, and that it is paramount that an applicant take the
execution of an SCA very seriously. This would include reading each and every
question in its entirety before certifying one’s answers. Anything less that giving an SCA
one’s full attention and consideration shows poor judgment. Here, Applicant may not
have been deliberate in his failing to disclose his prescription drug abuse on the SCAs,
but his admitted failure to read the question to completion is worrisome. Regardless,
having jumped to the incorrect conclusion that security concerns only stemmed from
illegal drugs, it is not illogical for Applicant to have declined to disclose his prescription
drug abuse during a polygraph unless that particular kind of abuse was explicitly asked.
To this point, Applicant’s explanations are not implausible, per se. Although it is
curious that he failed the polygraph with regard to drug questions when, apparently, he
was not asked about prescription drug abuse and he did not at that time believe such
abuse was a security issue. However, the situation involving the May 2012 interview
with an investigator in which he again failed to fully disclose his prescription drug abuse
between 2008 and 2011 is troublesome. By that point, according to his own testimony,
he had come clean about his prescription drug abuse to a polygrapher in July 2011, told
his wife about his failed polygraph, commenced counseling to address his misuse of
prescription medications, and developed alternative techniques for stress reduction. If
all of that is true, there is no explanation for why, during the May 2012 interview, he
7
“wasn’t telling the whole truth” and was “less than forthcoming” or “obfuscating” with
regard to prescription drug abuse, such as mixing alcohol with his wife’s pain
medication to relax.
In considering this concession, it is relevant that there is no evidence that he
made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct his omission, that his incomplete answers
were made on the advice of counsel, or other evidence that could raise a relevant
mitigating condition. While it can be argued that his counseling has helped him accept
his past drug abuse and find alternative forms of stress relief, such counseling is not the
type contemplated in Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is
unlikely to recur). Moreover, Applicant’s “less than forthcoming” answers occurred
nearly a year after his counseling had begun. That counseling was initially prompted in
response to what he learned after giving incomplete answers during the 2011
polygraph. At best, Applicant’s openness to discuss the matter and his obvious
contrition raises AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Multiple facts speak in Applicant’s favor. He is a mature and educated family man who
is a valued employee. He served honorably in the U.S. military and excelled in college.
He was first granted a security clearance at age 18 and has maintained one for the
majority of his adult life without incident. Therefore, it can be assumed he understands
the gravity and significance of both the application and investigation stages of seeking a
security clearance.
Guideline H security concerns related to Applicant’s actual abuse of prescription
medication can be mitigated, particularly because of the period of abstinence,
counseling, and the fact it is not likely to recur. The incidents noted under Guideline E,
for the most part, could be mitigated in pieces because there is no actual evidence that
Applicant deliberately falsified his answers on the SCAs. Even the failure to disclose
those same facts during the polygraph could, giving Applicant the benefit of the doubt,
be mitigated for the same reason. It gives one pause, however, to consider how
Applicant failed a polygraph over a drug-related question when at the time, he
apparently did not know that his prescription drug use was cause for concern.  
8
A year after Applicant learned that prescription drug abuse was a security
concern, and after he sought counseling to accept his past drug abuse and find
alternative therapies for stress, Applicant was interviewed in May 2012. Applicant
admits that he “wasn’t telling the whole truth” and was “less than forthcoming” or
“obfuscating” with regard to his prescription drug abuse during that meeting. Such
concessions are tantamount to an admission that Applicant intentionally tried to
withhold information about the prescription drug abuse. It has been barely 14 months
since Applicant chose to be “less than forthcoming” with an investigator. Less than two
years has provided insufficient time for Applicant to  reestablish a demonstrated record
of candor, reliability, and sound judgment. 
In sum, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct security
concerns. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. It is noted that the denial
of a security clearance does not preclude the ability to reapply for a security clearance.
It is further noted that a denial does not necessarily indicate anything adverse about an
applicant’s character or loyalty. It simply means that the individual present insufficient
evidence to meet the strict standards controlling security clearances. Clearance is
denied.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a–1b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
