 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-07087 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Karl G. Blanke, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual 
Behavior). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on in March 2008, and his 
application was granted in August 2008. He applied for eligibility for access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI) in November 2010. His application was denied on 
February 17, 2012. (GX 2.) Based on information obtained during the adjudication of his 
application for SCI eligibility, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) on February 5, 2013, alleging security concerns under Guideline D. 
DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 15, 2013; answered it on March 8, 
2013; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on April 5, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on April 15, 
2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 19, 2013, scheduling the hearing for May 29, 2013. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old architect employed by a federal contractor. He 
received a bachelor’s degree in architecture in June 1994 and a master’s degree in May 
1997. He worked for several architectural companies from March 1997 to February 
2007, when he began his current job. He is a “studio lead,” supervising up to 15 
architects and interns on various projects. (Tr. 25.) He married in June 2012. He and his 
wife have no children. He first received a security clearance in June 2005. 
 
 In May 2011, while being interviewed in connection with a polygraph examination 
required for SCI eligibility, Applicant disclosed that, between 1989 and 1991, he 
masturbated eight to ten times while looking at pornographic magazines that had been 
on sale at the drug store where he was employed. He was alone in a storage loft when 
he masturbated. He hid the magazines in a hole in a wall that was left from previous 
construction. He also disclosed that, between 1997 and 2003, while employed as an 
architect, he masturbated and ejaculated into his pants one time while sitting at his desk 
in a cubicle at work. Other workers were in the area, but Applicant did not believe that 
he was detected. Finally, he disclosed that, between 1997 and May 2011, he 
masturbated about once a month “at most,” for no more than one minute while at his 
desk in his cubicle, with other workers in the area. He told the interviewer that the last 
incident was about two months prior to the interview. He stated that he was aroused by 
his thoughts and the attire of female coworkers, and that he masturbated without 
reaching into his clothing or exposing himself, stopping before he ejaculated. (GX 3 at 
1-2.) 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed in March 2012 about the basis for the denial of 
SCI eligibility, he told the investigator that he masturbated at work about once a year. 
(GX 4 at 5.) In a follow-up telephonic interview in April 2012, he told the investigator that 
the conduct occurred “a couple of times over the years,” most recently during the last 
half of 2010, and that he did so for less than 30 seconds each time. He told the 
interviewer that his conduct occurred when he “needed to adjust” himself during an 
erection and that he did not reach inside his clothing or expose himself. (GX 4 at 6-8.) 
 
 
3 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he masturbated six or seven times while 
working at the drug store. (Tr. 29.) He testified that from 2003 to late 2010, he found it 
necessary to “adjust” himself less than once a year, and that there had been no 
incidents requiring “adjustment” since late 2010. (Tr. 34.) He testified that the last 
incident was about six months before the May 2010 interview, and that the report 
reflecting that he masturbated about two months prior to the interview was inaccurate. 
(Tr. 36.) Finally, he testified that he used the term “masturbation” instead of 
“adjustment” during the May 2010 interview, because he believed that any touching of 
his genitals constituted masturbation. However, he looked up the definition of 
masturbation after he realized that the allegations were serious, and he learned that 
touching or “adjusting” himself was not masturbation. (Tr. 39.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a college professor. She testified that they met in the fall of 
2009 through an online dating service. She testified that Applicant is a reliable, 
responsible, and conscientious worker, and his sexual behavior is not unusual. 
Applicant told her about the allegations after his May 2010 interview, and she accepted 
his explanation that his behavior consisted of adjusting himself after he became 
sexually aroused. (Tr. 44-47.) 
  
 Applicant presented letters attesting to his technical expertise, dedication, 
security awareness, and reliability from a coworker, his facility security officer, and his 
project manager. He testified that authors of the three letters were aware that he had 
lost his clearance, but he did not tell them the specific allegations on which the action 
was based, because the allegations were “extraordinarily embarrassing.” (AX 1, 2, and 
3; Tr. 28.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
4 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant masturbated at his work desk up to once a 
month from 1997 to late 2010. The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG 
¶ 18:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
 
5 
 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. . . . 
 
 In May 2011, Applicant told an investigator that he masturbated about once a 
month and that each incident lasted for no more than a minute. In March 2012, he told 
an investigator that he masturbated about once a year, instead of once a month. In April 
2012, he told an investigator that his conduct occurred “a couple of times over the 
years,” and that it lasted less than 30 seconds instead of no more than a minute. At the 
hearing, he testified that his conduct occurred less than once a year. He used the term 
“masturbate” in May 2011 and March 2012, but in the April 2012 interview and at the 
hearing he recanted his admission that he masturbated and stated that he needed to 
“adjust” himself during an erection, claiming that he previously thought that any touching 
of his genitals constituted masturbation.  
 
 At the time of his May 2011 interview, Applicant was a well-educated, 39-year-old 
male. I found his recantation of his disclosures during the May 2011 interview and his 
explanation at the hearing for changing his terminology from “masturbating” to 
“adjusting” himself implausible and unconvincing. The evidence reflects that Applicant 
was extremely embarrassed about his conduct, and that he attempted to minimize the 
frequency, duration, and nature of his conduct in his April 2012 interview and at the 
hearing, because he realized that his security clearance was at risk.  
 
 I conclude that two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established: 
AG ¶ 13(c) (“sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress”) and AG ¶ 13(d) (“sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that 
reflects lack of discretion or judgment”). AG ¶ 13(b) (“a pattern of compulsive, self-
destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that the person is unable to stop or that may be 
symptomatic of a personality disorder”) is not established, because no evidence from 
medical doctors, psychiatrists, or psychologists was introduced by either party to 
establish to presence or absence of sexual or personality disorders. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 14(b): the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 14(c): the behavior no long serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
AG ¶ 14(d): the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and 
discreet. 
 
 AG ¶ 14(b) is not fully established. Applicant testified that his last “adjustment” 
occurred in late 2010, about 30 months before the hearing. While 30 months is a 
 
6 
 
significant period of time, it occurred while Applicant was under the pressure of trying to 
protect his security clearance. His conduct also was infrequent, but it did not occur 
under unusual circumstances. I am not convinced that it will not recur if Applicant’s 
clearance is no longer in jeopardy.  
 
 AG ¶ 14(c) is not established. Applicant admitted at the hearing that he is 
extremely embarrassed by his conduct and has not revealed it to his supervisors or 
coworkers. 
 
 AG ¶ 14(d) is not established. Applicant’s conduct occurred in a cubicle at his 
workplace, with other employees in the area. His conduct was neither private nor 
discreet. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline D in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. His conduct at the drug store from 
1989 to 1991 was private and occurred while he was a teenager. It was not alleged in 
the SOR, and I regard it as mitigated. However, his conduct as an adult was not private 
or discrete, and it demonstrated poor judgment. He is understandably embarrassed by 
his conduct, but his disingenuous efforts to minimize it during his security interviews and 
at the hearing were unconvincing, and they reinforced my doubts about his judgment 
and reliability. His embarrassment makes him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.  
 
 
7 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline D, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on his sexual conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D (Sexual Behavior):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
