 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02407 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 12, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 21, 2012. He did not specify whether 
he wanted a hearing or the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
December 11, 2012, Department Counsel requested a hearing. The case was assigned 
to me on April 18, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on April 23, 2013, scheduling the hearing for May 22, 2013. The 
 
2 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2008. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he 
has held since about 2009. He was born in Afghanistan, and he attended college for two 
years there. He immigrated to the United States in 1977, and he became a U.S. citizen 
in 1989. He is married for the second time. He has four adult children from his first 
marriage. He has two adult stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant has worked as a linguist in Afghanistan since 2009. As a civilian 
contractor, Applicant was subject to General Order 1, which prohibited the possession 
and consumption of alcohol. His company’s policy also precluded him from possessing 
and consuming alcohol while in Afghanistan.2 
 
 In April 2010, it was reported by a U.S. military investigator that Applicant was 
visiting a bar that was in their compound. After he was instructed not to drink and not to 
visit the bar, it was reported that he made attempts to obtain alcohol through other 
means. The report also noted that it was determined that Applicant was “revealing 
sensitive, but unclassified, details of his work with un-cleared local nationals.”3 
 
 Applicant was assigned to work in Afghanistan with a U.S. military staff sergeant 
(E-6). In April 2010, the staff sergeant reported that Applicant frequented a bar that was 
in their compound as a guest of a contractor from an allied country. The staff sergeant 
stated that Applicant became intoxicated on several occasions. On one occasion, the 
staff sergeant warned Applicant that he was not authorized to drink. Applicant 
responded that he was a civilian and he could drink if he liked. The staff sergeant also 
reported that Applicant requested that military servicemembers from an allied country 
have alcohol mailed to Afghanistan for him. The staff sergeant reported that, over an 
unsecure Afghan cell phone, Applicant discussed with an unknown linguist the 
movements and activities of the other linguist.4 
 
 In July 2010, Applicant’s employer reported to the DOD: 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-26, 48-49; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 29-30; GE 1-3. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 19, 32; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
[Applicant] has violated company policy multiple times by drinking alcohol 
at a local bar, trying to obtain alcohol from [allied country] military, and 
discussing sensitive information over an unsecured Afghan cell phone.5 
 
 Applicant admits to drinking a minimal amount of alcohol at two birthday 
celebrations in Afghanistan, but he denies he became intoxicated. He regrets violating 
the rules, and he stated that it will not happen again. He also denies asking any allied 
servicemembers to obtain alcohol for him. He stated that he rarely drinks when he is in 
the United States, and then only a small amount. He stated that he only drinks about 
twice a year, on special occasions such as his wife’s birthday. He stated that the staff 
sergeant who filed the report was jealous of the amount of money he was earning as a 
linguist in Afghanistan.6 
 
 Applicant denied that he revealed sensitive information to local nationals. He 
stated that he knew his job and the requirement to protect sensitive information. He 
stated that he did not have any relatives or friends in Afghanistan with whom he could 
have discussed sensitive information.7 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified that she has never seen Applicant drink alcohol. She 
stated that Applicant told her that he did not drink in Afghanistan.8 
 
 I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. After considering all the evidence, I 
find by substantial evidence9 that Applicant drank on several occasions in Afghanistan 
and became intoxicated; that he requested that allied military servicemembers obtain 
alcohol for him; and that he revealed sensitive, but unclassified, details of his work with 
uncleared local nationals.  
 
 Applicant has worked under combat conditions in Afghanistan for several years. 
The U.S. military personnel he worked with praised his character, abilities, and service 
to the mission.10 One U.S. officer wrote: 
 
At [location], [Applicant] lived in austere conditions, going months without 
showers or electricity. He shared living spaces with the [U.S. 
                                                          
5 GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 19-48, 62-63. 
 
7 Tr. at 22-24, 40-42. 
 
8 Tr. at 52-56. 
 
9 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the personal or 
professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to 
classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. at 518 (1988). “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 
(4th Cir. 1994). 
 
10 AE B. 
 
4 
 
servicemembers] in a dusty, war-torn, and crumbling facility infested with 
rodents and insects. He received little to no mail and ate a sub-standard, 
repetitive menu of MREs with the [U.S. servicemembers]. In every way, he 
suffered the "Spartan" conditions to which [U.S. servicemembers] have 
grown accustomed over the years. More importantly, he, along with the 
[U.S. servicemembers] at [location], received nearly 30 days of indirect fire 
and faced an ever-present IED threat. Despite these [un]inhabitable and 
life-threatening living conditions, [Applicant] remained stalwart in heart 
where others would have collapsed under the weight of circumstances. 
Throughout his meritorious service with the [U.S. servicemembers], he 
remained the consummate professional focusing on his duties. Moreover, 
[Applicant] personally expressed himself by providing fatherly care and 
devotion to the [U.S. servicemembers] with whom he worked, often 
cooking hot and fresh meals for [U.S. servicemembers] after a hard day’s 
work. He often rewarded the [U.S. servicemembers] with his warmth and 
kind generosity, which in turn provided the [U.S. servicemembers] with a 
sense of home. In sum, I consider him a hero to both the United States 
and Afghanistan.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
11 AE B. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant drank alcohol and attempted to obtain alcohol while in Afghanistan. 
General Order 1 prohibited the possession and consumption of alcohol, and Applicant’s 
company’s policy also precluded him from possessing and consuming alcohol. 
Applicant revealed sensitive information to local nationals. His conduct showed poor 
judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(e), and 16(f) are 
applicable as disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant has not accepted responsibility for his actions. His denials were not 
credible. I am unable to determine that his problematic behavior is unlikely to recur. 
There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his exemplary work 
under combat conditions in Afghanistan. However, I have concerns about his judgment 
and willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
