 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 12-09368 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John M. Smith, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On August 21, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on September 
11, 2012.2  The DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him on December 5, 
2012, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
                                                          
1
 GE1 ((SF 86), dated December 5, 2011). 
 
2
 GE 4 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories, dated September 11, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The DOD adjudicators 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 19, 2012. In a sworn statement, dated 
January 3, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed March 18, 2013. The case was assigned to me on March 30, 2013. 
A Notice of Hearing was issued on May 7, 2013,3 and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on May 30, 2013. 
 
 During the hearing, nine Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 9) and seven 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE G) were admitted into evidence without objection.4 
The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 13, 2013. I kept the record open to enable 
Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity, and he 
submitted one additional document for which he had requested that I take administrative 
notice, and that document was accepted without objection. The record was closed on 
June 13, 2013. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the 
SOR by withdrawing the allegations pertaining to Guideline C (Foreign Preference) set 
forth in ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b., as well as one allegation pertaining to Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) set forth in ¶ 1.c. There being no objection, the motion was granted. 
 
Department Counsel also requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Republic of Colombia (Colombia) appearing in seven 
U.S. Government publications. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they are 
easily verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this 
instance, the Government relied on source information regarding Colombia in 
publications of the U.S. Department of State,5 and the Congressional Research 
                                                          
3
 Because of travel limitations associated with the sequestration, Applicant’s lack of access to a local military 
facility, and the absence of any availability of a video teleconference facility, scheduling for the hearing was delayed 
until it was decided that Applicant would travel from his home state to Arlington, VA, for the hearing. 
 
4
 Two additional AE were offered but subsequently withdrawn. 
 
5
 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, U.S. Relations With Colombia, dated 
October 23, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on 
Human Rights Practices for 2011 - Colombia, undated; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 2, dated July 31, 2012; U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Colombia, dated October 3, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of 
Counterterrorism, Foreign Terrorist Organizations, dated September 28, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Colombia -
Country Specific Information, dated January 31, 2012. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Service.6 Applicant also requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to Colombia appearing in three U.S. Government 
publications, two of which were updated versions of the publications identified by 
Department Counsel. Those publications were, likewise, from the U.S. Department of 
State.7 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by both the Government and Applicant, 
pursuant to Rule 201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain 
facts,8 as set forth below under the Colombia subsection. 
 
Findings of Fact9 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both of the factual allegations 
pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old president of a defense contractor, a company he 
founded in 1989.10 Applicant has never served in the U.S. military,11 and he has never 
held a security clearance.12  
 
  
                                                          
6
 Congressional Research Service (CRS), CRS Report for Congress, Latin America: Terrorism Issues, dated 
March 2, 2012. 
 
7
 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Colombia, dated April 11, 2013 (an 
updated version of the publication identified by Department Counsel); U.S. Department of State, Office of the 
Spokesperson, Media Note, Certification of the Colombian Government with Respect to Human Rights Related 
Conditions, dated August 30, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012 - Colombia, undated. 
 
8
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
9
 Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits. 
 
10
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
11
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13; Tr. at 95. 
 
12
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 59. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Colombia.13 Both of his parents (his father was self-
employed; and his mother, was in retail sales)14 were born in Colombia, and they still 
reside there.15 Neither parent has had any relationship with the Colombian government 
or its military or intelligence services.16 His parents have never been approached or 
threatened by anyone.17 Applicant was raised in Colombia. He was educated at an 
American school in Colombia, with the intention of obtaining a college education in the 
United States. Upon his high school graduation, he was drafted into the Colombian 
Army for one year.18 After being released from military service, Applicant came to the 
United States where he enrolled in a local community college.19 He received an 
associate’s degree in 1984.20 He subsequently enrolled in a local university, and in 
1986, he received a bachelor’s degree in business administration.21 He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1991.22  
 
Applicant was married in the United States to a native-born U.S. citizen in 1986.23 
He and his wife have three sons, born in the United States in 1991, 1994, and 1998.24 
Applicant has two brothers, both of whom were born in Colombia and became 
naturalized U.S. citizens.25 They are both professional engineers residing in the United 
States for over 30 years with their respective native-born U.S. citizen wives.26 Applicant 
also has one sister who was born in Colombia.27 While she is still a Colombian citizen,28 
                                                          
13
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
14
 Tr. at 66-67, 125-126. 
 
15
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17-19; GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 8, 2012), at 1-2. 
Applicant’s mother attended high school in the United States.  
 
16
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17-19; Tr. at 70, 125-126. 
 
17
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 3. 
 
18
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13-14; GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 1. 
 
19
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11. 
 
20
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11. 
 
21
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 11. 
 
22
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 7; GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 1. 
 
23
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
24
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 22-23. 
 
25
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 21-22; GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 2. 
 
26
 GE 4 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories), supra note 2, at 8; Tr. at 91-92. 
 
27
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19-20. 
 
28
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 20. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
she has been a permanent resident of the United States for about eight years, and is in 
the final stages of the U.S. naturalization process.29 She was a linguistic manager 
teaching English, and is the human resources manager for Applicant’s company.30 One 
of Applicant’s brothers served in the Colombian Army, and his sister worked briefly for 
the Colombian government.31  
 
Applicant maintains substantial financial interests in Colombia. He owns an 
apartment in which his parents reside, has an investment interest in a hotel, and has a 
bank account.32 He estimated his total Colombian financial interests to be about 
$700,000.33 He has been providing financial support for his parents, including their 
medical and living expenses, for over 20 years.34 Although the amount varies from 
month to month, he estimated he furnishes them about $50,000 per year.35 He keeps in 
weekly contact by telephone with his parents.36 Applicant takes fairly frequent trips to 
Colombia, lasting between one and ten days, generally to see and care for his 
parents.37 His brothers visit their parents less frequently, and his sister sees them up to 
two times per year.38 Neither he nor his sister has ever experienced any problems with 
Colombian police, customs, or foreign individuals while on any of their respective visits 
to Colombia.39 
 
Upon being questioned about his respective affiliations with the United States 
and Colombia, Applicant responded:40 
 
I love this country. I'd give my life to this country. I have never had a desire 
of going in living in Colombia. Great country; great people. But my life is 
here in the United States.  This is where, it's where I'll be buried, here in 
the United States, not in Colombia. . . So I have no affiliation of any kind to 
anybody in Colombia other than my parents. 
 
                                                          
29
 GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 2. 
 
30
 Tr. at 126-128. 
 
31
 Tr. at 127-129. 
 
32
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 31-33; GE 4, supra note 15, at 3. 
 
33
 Tr. at 130-131; GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 3. 
 
34
 GE 4 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories), supra note 2, at 32. 
 
35
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 33-34; GE 4, supra note 15, at 3. 
 
36
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17-19.  
 
37
 GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 4. 
 
38
 Tr. at 103. 
 
39
 GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 3. 
 
40
 Tr. at 72. 
 
6 
                                      
 
He added: “I have the absolute utmost love for this country.  You know, we're in the 
business of saving lives, and I will do everything in my power to protect that, to preserve 
that and to protect that.”41 
 
When Applicant first started working, he was employed in his brother’s father-in-
law’s machine shop in the United States earning about $4 per hour. Applicant started 
his own business, continuing to use the machine shop, but soon his business was 
generating more income than he was making in salary. Applicant’s company has grown 
into a thriving business with over 600,000 square feet of manufacturing space.42 It has 
had between 10 and 400 employees, and generates an annual revenue of between 
$1,000,000 and $5,000,000.43 Applicant is also the sole or joint owner of a substantial 
number of closely held diverse corporations, limited liability companies, and other 
business entities, and he and his wife have considerable real estate and financial 
holdings in the United States.44 
 
Eleemosynary Activities 
 
Applicant’s financial success not only benefits him and his immediate family, but 
because of his generosity and compassion, as a patron, contributor, and philanthropist, 
he has shared his bounty with others as well. He made a $2,000,000 gift to a local 
university;45 gave $21,066 to a family to avoid a foreclosure;46 and has given over 
$5,000,000 to his local church, which has grown from 40 members to 4,000 members, 
for church relocation, outreach services to repair homes, food distribution, and 
addressing pockets of poverty, much of it contributed anonymously.47  
 
Colombia 
 
Formerly under the control of Spain, Colombia’s independence was recognized 
in 1822. It has common borders with Venezuela and Brazil on the east, Ecuador and 
Peru on the south, and Panama and the North Pacific Ocean on the west, with the 
Caribbean Sea on the north.  It is a middle-income country and one of the oldest 
democracies in Latin America. For the past 50 years, Colombia has been engaged in 
intense armed conflict with insurgent and paramilitary groups perpetuated by their 
                                                          
 
41
 Tr. at 87. 
 
42
 GE 9 (Company Brochure, undated). 
 
43
 GE 6 (Company Profile, dated May 28, 2013); Tr. at 121-122. 
 
44
 GE 3 (Personal Financial Statement, dated June 30, 2011). Applicant estimated that his Colombian 
financial interests are less than five per cent of his net worth. See, GE 4 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories), supra 
note 2, at 32. 
 
45
 GE 7 (Press Release, undated). Applicant claimed he tried to make the gift anonymously, but the 
university wanted it to be attributed to him. See, Tr. at 120-121. 
 
46
 GE 2 (Affidavit, dated May 9, 2012), at 2. 
 
47
 Tr. at 33-37. 
 
7 
                                      
 
involvement in widespread illegal drug production and trafficking, along with criminal 
and narcotics trafficking organizations. Peace talks between the Government of 
Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) began in October 
2012. Long-term U.S. interests in the region include promoting security, stability, and 
prosperity in Colombia, and according to the U.S. Department of State, Colombia has 
made progress in addressing its security, development, and governance challenges. 
 
The Secretary of State has designated three organizations operating within 
Colombia as foreign terrorist organizations: the leftist FARC, the leftist National 
Liberation Army (ELN), and the demobilized rightist paramilitary United Self Defense 
Forces of Colombia (AUC).  Colombia has experienced a number of terrorist attacks by 
the FARC and the ELN, with the most notable 2011 incidents directed primarily at 
Colombian National Police and the Colombian Army, with a number of civilians also 
killed or wounded. The AUC membership dwindled, and while it remained inactive as a 
formal organization, some former members continued to engage in criminal activities, 
mostly drug trafficking, in newly emerging criminal organizations known as BACRIM. 
The ELN has a dwindling membership with diminished resources and reduced offensive 
capability, but has continued to inflict casualties through the use of land mines and 
ambushes, and continues to fund its operations through drug trafficking. The FARC has 
been weakened significantly by the government’s military campaign against it. 
Nevertheless, FARC remains responsible for terrorist attacks, extortion, and 
kidnappings. The incidence of kidnapping in Colombia has diminished significantly from 
its peak at the beginning of the decade, but kidnappings and holding civilians for 
ransom or as political bargaining chips continues. No one is immune from kidnapping on 
the basis of occupation, nationality, or other factors. 
 
Overall law enforcement cooperation between Colombia and the United States 
has been outstanding, and Colombia has extradited more people to the United States 
than any other country. Although the Colombian Government has continued to address 
human rights abuses, significant problems remain. Extrajudicial killings, insubordinate 
military collaboration with members of illegal armed groups, forced disappearances, 
overcrowded and insecure prisons, harassment of human rights groups and activists, 
violence against women, trafficking in persons, illegal child labor, societal discrimination 
against indigenous persons, corruption, and an overburdened and inefficient judiciary, 
are but a few of the continuing issues. On August 20, 2012, the Department of State 
certified to Congress that the Colombian Government and armed forces are meeting 
statutory criteria related to human rights. 
 
Tens of thousands of U.S. citizens safely visit Colombia each year for tourism, 
business, university studies and volunteer work. Security in Colombia has improved 
significantly in recent years, but violence linked to narco-trafficking continues to affect 
some rural areas and parts of large cities. There have been no reports of U.S. citizens 
being targeted because of their nationality.  
 
  
 
8 
                                      
 
Character References  
 
 The President of a local university has known Applicant for several years as both 
a personal friend and a professional colleague. He noted that Applicant currently serves 
as vice chair of the board of trustees of the university, and that Applicant is “highly 
respected throughout this region as a business, civic and church leader and as a 
generous philanthropist who supports many worthy causes.”48 He added that Applicant 
has a reputation for the highest standards of morality and ethics, and is respected and 
trustworthy.  
 
A county commissioner and the vice chairman of another county have both 
known Applicant for many years, and they have described Applicant as an upstanding 
citizen, an active member of the community, as a supporter of charitable events, and as 
a principal in economic development.49 The sheriffs of two different counties and a city 
chief of police also commented on Applicant’s importance to their respective 
communities. Applicant is known for his excellent reputation for his honesty, hard work 
and commitment to making the communities a better place, not only on an economic 
level, but through personal involvement as well.50  
 
A retired lieutenant general who knows Applicant personally and professionally, 
characterized Applicant’s “impeccable ethical standards, integrity and patriotism,” and 
would trust Applicant “in any circumstance.”51 Applicant’s pastor, a man he has known 
for over 20 years, described Applicant as a trustworthy confidant, model citizen, Sunday 
School teacher, church elder, major contributor, and a community leader.52 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”53 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”54   
                                                          
48
 AE F (Character Reference, dated May 22, 2013). 
 
49
 AE A (Character Reference, dated May 22, 2013); AE D (Character Reference, undated). 
 
50
 AE B (Character Reference, dated May 22, 2013); AE C (Character Reference, dated May 22, 2013); AE 
E (Character Reference, dated May 23, 2013). 
 
51
 AE G (Character Reference, dated May 28, 2013). 
 
52
 Tr. at 39-40. 
 
53
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
54
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
9 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”55 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.56  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”57 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”58 Thus, nothing 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
55
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
56
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
57
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
58
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
10 
                                      
 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.59 Applicant’s close relationships with his parents, 
both of whom are citizens and residents of Colombia; and with his sister, a citizen of 
Colombia, but a permanent resident of the United States, are current security concerns 
for the Government. In addition, Department Counsel contends: 
 
The issue that brings us before Your Honor this morning is the fact that 
[Applicant’s] success is a two-edged sword. It has brought him great 
riches in the US, and it has also raised his exposure and vulnerability in 
his home country of Colombia, where his parents presently live. . . It's the 
result of that situation, in addition to the domestic situation in Colombia 
with the domestic terrorism and criminal elements and insurgencies that 
exist in that country, the extensive history of kidnappings for ransom and 
the like, that combined with [Applicant’s] visibility as a wealthy individual, 
makes him particularly vulnerable and creates a heightened risk under 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
59
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
11 
                                      
 
[AG ¶] 7(a) and, when traveling there to Colombia, [AG ¶] 7(i) of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), it is potentially disqualifying where there is contact with a foreign family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of 
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Similarly, under AG ¶ 
7(e), security concerns may be raised when there is a substantial business, financial, or 
property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated 
business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. In addition, it is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 7(i) where there is 
conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make the individual 
vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign person, group, 
government, or country. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(e), and 7(i) apply in this case. However, the security significance of 
these identified conditions requires further examination of Applicant’s respective 
relationships with his parents and his sister, as well as an examination of Applicant’s 
“conduct” while in Colombia, to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential 
conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation. Also, if the value or routine nature of the foreign 
business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a 
conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual, AG ¶ 8(f) may apply, 
 
12 
                                      
 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.60 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”61 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, the United States and Colombia share a strong relationship and 
cooperate on numerous matters. The evidence does not indicate that the Colombian 
government targets U.S. classified information. To the contrary, it appears that 
Department Counsel’s main concern is not the actions of the Colombian government, 
but rather the actions of criminals, terrorists, and narco-terrorists in conducting illegal 
terrorist attacks, extortion, and kidnappings. Applicant maintains a close and continuing 
contact and relationship with his parents. They maintain a low profile in Colombia. His 
father worked in private industry and is mother is a now a homemaker; neither have 
connections to the Colombian government or military. His parents have never 
experienced violence in over a half-century they have lived there. It is unlikely that 
Applicant would have to choose between the interests of his parents and the interests of 
the United States.  
 
Tens of thousands of U.S. citizens safely visit Colombia each year for a variety of 
reasons, including tourism, business, university studies, and volunteer work. Security in 
Colombia has improved significantly in recent years. Nevertheless, violence linked to 
narco-trafficking continues to affect some rural areas and parts of large cities. In some 
ways, the risk of residing in Colombia is somewhat similar to the risks of residing in 
Boston, New York City, Chicago, Detroit, Washington, D.C., Oklahoma City, or other 
metropolitan areas in the United States that have experienced substantial criminal or 
terrorist-related incidents. There is always the possibility of kidnappings, drug-related 
violence, or terrorist attacks, against otherwise innocent individuals. Moreover, there 
have been no reports of U.S. citizens being targeted in Colombia because of their 
nationality.  
                                                          
60
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
61
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
13 
                                      
 
Applicant’s parents still reside in Colombia and there is some risk – a 
“heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security clearance because of his close 
and continuing relationship with his parents. Because of his sister’s permanent 
residence in the United States, that heightened risk regarding his relationship with her is 
considerably diminished and there is little continuing substantial risk of any kind of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify 
Applicant from holding a security clearance.  
 
As to Applicant’s “conduct” while visiting Colombia, there is no evidence that he 
engages in any risky or questionable conduct while in Colombia: he simply visits and 
cares for his parents’ needs. Department Counsel argued that Applicant “raised his 
exposure and vulnerability in his home country of Colombia,” largely because of his 
substantial contribution to a university in the United States and the fact that his name 
may be located on the Internet. There is little, if any, evidence to support that 
contention.  Applicant may be financially successful, and his name may be recognizable 
in certain sectors of the United States, but simply because an individual is successful in 
the United States and privately travels to another country is insufficient to conclude that 
his level of success has raised his exposure in that other country. In Colombia, 
Applicant is merely someone who is visiting the country for any number of reasons. He 
is not someone flashing his wealth to raise his exposure and vulnerability. As noted 
above, while there is always the possibility of kidnappings, drug-related violence, or 
terrorist attacks, against otherwise innocent individuals such as Applicant, there have 
been no reports of U.S. citizens – such as Applicant – being targeted in Colombia 
simply because of their nationality.  
 
By normal standards, Applicant’s financial and property interests in Colombia 
might be considered as “substantial.” But considering his overall net worth, those 
Colombian financial interests are less than five per cent of his net worth, thereby 
minimizing the significance of his financial and property interests in Colombia.  
  
Applicant has significant connections to the United States, having lived in the 
United States for over three decades. He was educated in an American school in 
Colombia and at two universities in the United States. His wife and children are native-
born U.S. citizens; his brothers have resided in the United States for over three decades 
as well, and are both naturalized U.S. citizens married to native-born U.S. citizens; and 
his sister, while still a Colombian citizen, has been a permanent U.S. resident for eight 
years, and is in the final stages of the U.S. naturalization process. Applicant is the sole 
or joint owner of a substantial number of closely held U.S. corporations, limited liability 
companies, and other business entities. He and his wife have considerable real estate 
and financial holdings in the United States. It is significant when he declares “I love this 
country. I'd give my life to this country.” I am persuaded that Applicant’s loyalty to the 
United States is steadfast and undivided, and that he has “such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict 
of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(f) apply, but 8(c) does 
not apply.  
 
 
14 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.62       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because his 
parents remain Colombian citizen-residents, he periodically travels to Colombia to visit 
and assist them, and he maintains a close and continuing contact and relationship with 
his parents. Everyone, including residents and visitors, could possibly be the intended or 
unintended victims of kidnappings, drug-related violence, or terrorist attacks. In addition, 
he maintains substantial financial and property interests in Colombia. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is much more 
substantial. Throughout his life, Applicant has exhibited a sense of responsibility and 
loyalty to his family, his church, his community, and his country. While it is true that 
Applicant has been financially successful, and is considered a patron, contributor, and 
philanthropist, this is not about his financial success. He has an excellent reputation for 
the highest standards of morality, ethics, and honesty, and is respected and trustworthy. 
He is known for his hard work and commitment to making the communities a better 
place, not only on an economic level, but through personal involvement as well. He is 
someone special when a retired lieutenant general characterizes Applicant’s 
“impeccable ethical standards, integrity and patriotism,” and would trust Applicant “in 
any circumstance.”  
 
Applicant declared that his life is here in the United States, and that he loves this 
country and would die for it.  Applicant is fully aware of the risks to himself and his 
parents in Colombia to the possibility of kidnappings, drug-related violence, or terrorist 
                                                          
62
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
attacks. These risks increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or 
exploit him.63 Moreover, while the “heightened risk” of terrorist activities occurring in 
Colombia is of significance, it should also be remembered that terrorists and would-be 
terrorists are also active in the United States, creating a substantial risk here as well. 
With the vast majority of his family members residing in the United States, there is a 
reduced risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Under the evidence presented, I have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Withdrawn 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
63
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
