1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-09088
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Patricia H. Wittie, Esq., and Daniel Strouse, Esq. 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has
mitigated the foreign influence security concern based on his strong and long-standing
family and employment ties to the United States, which outweigh and overcome his
recent marital ties to the Czech Republic. Accordingly, this case is decided for
Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On January 23, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Tr. 10–11. 2
 Exhibits 4, 7, and 8. 3
2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.1
The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the
security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence based on ties to the Czech
Republic.    
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on March 27, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled on April 18,
2013. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 25, 2018. 
Ruling on Procedure
Without objections, SOR ¶ 2.e was amended to allege that Applicant has two (not
three) brothers-in-law and one sister-in-law who are citizens of and residents in the
Czech Republic.  2
 
Findings of Fact
In his seven-page answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations set forth in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.e, as amended; he also provided detailed explanations. His admissions
and explanations are accepted and adopted and incorporated as findings of fact. In
addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 46-year-old president and facility security officer (FSO) of a small
technology company he established in 2003. Before that, he worked as a senior
network engineer for a federal contractor during 1998–2003. The available documentary
information shows he has a good, if not excellent, record of employment.  His3
employment history includes working as a subcontractor for a two-month period in 2003
in Iraq, where he provided technical support and training services. 
As a cleared facility, Applicant’s company is complying with the necessary
security requirements to maintain a facility clearance. For example, his company was
subject to a security inspection or assessment by the Defense Security Service as
 Exhibit 5. 4
 Tr. 130–131. 5
 Exhibits A and B. 6
 Exhibit B at 12 (personal financial statement). 7
 Exhibit A. 8
3
recently as August 2012, and the results were wholly satisfactory.  His company has4
never been cited for a security infraction or violation.  5
Applicant has held a security clearance, at the secret level or higher, since 1999.
He is seeking to retain a top-secret clearance. To that end, he completed a security
clearance application in March 2011, and he responded to written interrogatories in
December 2012.6
Applicant was born in South Vietnam, where he lived with his mother and two
older siblings, a brother and sister. They left South Vietnam in 1975 as part of the
Vietnamese boat people who fled the country in large numbers following the Fall of
Saigon, the event that marked the end of the Vietnam War. Applicant and his family
were rescued at sea by the U.S. Navy, and they eventually came to the United States
as refugees. They settled in a Mid-Atlantic state where they remain to this day.
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1987; his mother, brother, and sister are U.S.
citizens as well. 
Applicant’s first marriage ended in divorce in 1998. His marriage produced two
children, a son and daughter. Applicant and his former spouse share custody of the
children. Both children currently live with Applicant. In addition to the family home,
Applicant owns a second residential property he uses as a vacation and fishing home;
he considers it an investment property. He has no foreign business, financial, or
property interests. His net worth consists of his two residential properties and his
business.7
Applicant reported frequent overseas travel in his security clearance application.8
On one such trip to the Czech Republic, he made contact, via the Internet, with a Czech
citizen who is now his wife. After the initial contact, they engaged in a long-distance
courtship aided by modern technology. They married in 2011 when she was in the
United States visiting Applicant. She returned to the Czech Republic at the end of the
trip and she resides there today, although Applicant has traveled there since they
married.  
Applicant’s spouse is self-employed in the real-estate business. She is pending
immigration to the United States as a spouse of a U.S. citizen. Indeed, Applicant
explained that a condition or requirement of the marriage is that his wife will live here in
 Tr. 69. 9
 Exhibit 1. 10
 Exhibit 6. 11
 Tr. 101–102. 12
4
the United States and become a U.S. citizen.  The immigration petition was approved in9
April 2013, and that matter is pending.  Applicant and his wife have not acted on the10
immigration matter because she was diagnosed with cervical cancer in mid-2012.  She11
has since been receiving medical treatment and care for her condition in the Czech
Republic. Her condition, as explained by Applicant, is serious.12
Also divorced, Applicant’s spouse is the mother of one child, a now 20-year-old
daughter who is also a citizen-resident of the Czech Republic. His stepdaughter is a
student and works in retail to support herself.
In addition to his U.S. family, with whom he is close, Applicant now has several
in-laws who are citizens of and residents in the Czech Republic. Applicant has met his
in-laws, but his interaction with them is limited due to a language barrier. He does not
speak Czech and English is not his native language. His Czech in-laws speak little to no
English. Applicant’s spouse speaks English, but she is not fluent, and her efforts to
translate conversations between Applicant and her family are modest. Despite the
language barrier, Applicant explained that he endeavors to be respectful to his in-laws
when he meets with them. He described a typical visit with his in-laws would consist of
sitting at the family table and having coffee, or perhaps a meal and drinking Czech beer.
The status of his Czech in-laws is summarized in the following table.
Relationship Citizenship & Residence Employment
Father-in-law Czech Republic Retired salesman
Mother-in-law Czech Republic Retired teacher
Brother-in-law Czech Republic Officer manager
Sister-in-law Czech Republic Restaurant/pub owner &
waitress
Brother-in-law (via
marriage)
Czech Republic Restaurant/pub owner &
cook 
Although his second marriage is, at this point, unconventional, Applicant
expressed a commitment to his marriage and displayed an emotional connection to his
spouse during the hearing. Nevertheless, Applicant is also committed to his business
and understands his obligations as both a clearance holder and FSO. He stated the
 Tr. 78–80. 13
 Exhibits 2 and 3. 14
5
following when questioned about a potential conflict between his obligations and loyalty
to the United States and his spouse: 
Well, when I answer that freely to you, and I think that some people would
find that, “Are you crazy?”
But I married my wife and absolutely, I love my wife, and that I would take
care of her, you know, when it comes down to, you know, meeting her
needs, like food or health or in sickness.
But when it comes down to my loyalty to the United States, I would do
whatever it takes, okay, to meet my country’s expectations.
Whether it is, if they were - - if they were to come to me today, and I would
say this, if they were to come to me today and say, “[Applicant], you got to
pick a side here. You know, we feel that you’re a risk and I think that you
need to decide whether you’re going to continue to be married to your
wife, or you continue on to support us and work for us and support the
Government.”
I would absolutely have to and want to, okay, support my country,
because there is nothing more about my passion about this country,
because there is a lot of history and lot of memorable moments for me and
my family, being here as an immigrant boat person, working hard.
I have my daughter and my son here, who looks up after me, that you
know, that they want to also follow my footstep, in working for the
Government.
So, I mean, I really don’t have - - it’s a very easy answer, and you know, I
can’t have all - - everything that I want in life, but I do know that when it
comes down to priorities, I have to know what those priorities are, and
those priorities are my children, my mother, my country, and my wife is
really second.  I hate to say that.13
 
The following information about the Czech Republic is derived from recent official
reports from the U.S. Department of State:  (1) the Czech Republic is a parliamentary14
republic and it was established in 1993 (the former Czechoslovak state was established
in 1918); (2) the Czech Republic has one of the most developed and industrialized
economies in Central and Eastern Europe; (3) the Czech Republic became a member
of NATO in 1999, and it became a full member of the European Union (EU) in 2004; (4)
the Czech Armed Forces have transformed from a Warsaw Pact-era force to that of an
 To cite a recent example of the excellent relations, the Secretary of Defense hosted the Czech Minister of15
Defense at the Pentagon in November 2012. They discussed U.S.–Czech bilateral defense cooperation, the
posture of U.S. forces in Europe, plans for increasing interoperability among NATO Allies, Afghanistan
transition, and the situation in Syria. News Release, Readout of Secretary Panetta’s Meeting with Czech
Minister of Defense Alexandr Vondra, No. 920-12, dated Nov. 20, 2012, which is available at
www.defense.gov. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to16
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
6
NATO Ally, and for over a decade it has made significant contributions to coalition and
NATO operations in Afghanistan; and (5) relations between the United States and the
Czech Republic are excellent and reflect the common approach both have to the many
challenges facing the world at present, such as issues ranging from Afghanistan to the
Balkans.  15
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As16
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt17
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An18
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  19
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting20
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An21
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 24
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).25
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.26
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 27
 AG ¶ 6. 28
7
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme23
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.24
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.25
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it26
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The gravamen of the SOR is whether Applicant’s recent marital ties to the Czech
Republic disqualify him from eligibility for a security clearance. Under Guideline B for
foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt27
due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.28
 I did not consider the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 7(a), because the facts and circumstances surrounding29
Applicant’s ties to the Czech Republic—a country ruled by a democratic form of government, a member of the
EU, and an important NATO Ally—do not create a “heightened risk” within the meaning of the guideline.  
8
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s ties to the Czech Republic, I have especially considered the following
disqualifying condition: 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information.29
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant is a small-business owner who is working hard and enjoying success
as a federal contractor. A clearance holder since 1999, he also serves as his company’s
FSO. He has complied with all requirements placed upon him as the president and FSO
of a company that is a cleared facility. In addition, for a two-month period in 2003, he
worked as a subcontractor in Iraq, a place known as a high-risk environment for our
soldiers and the contractors who support them. He has never lived in the Czech
Republic, as he immigrated here after fleeing South Vietnam at the end of the war. He
has lived here since 1975, went to school here, operates his business here, and has
two children, who are both native-born U.S. citizens, here in the United States. He
intends for his wife to live here and become a U.S. citizen as well, although her
immigration is currently on hold pending her medical condition. His ties or connections
to his spouse’s family members in the Czech Republic are hindered by a language
barrier and his infrequent interactions with them. His interactions with them are
respectful, but pro forma or perfunctory or both. Taken together, his family and
employment ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to the Czech
Republic, and these facts and circumstances weigh in his favor.  
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).30
9
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has ties to the Czech Republic via his recent marriage to a
Czech citizen. This circumstance should not be dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or
unrealistic because even friendly countries can pose security concerns. With that said,
his ties to the Czech Republic are quite limited or distant, but for his spouse with whom
he shares an emotional bond. Yet he also explained unequivocally that he puts his
loyalty to his children and mother, and his loyalty to the United States, ahead of his
loyalty to his spouse. On balance, I am satisfied that this is not a case of “divided
loyalties” as contemplated by the guideline. Instead, I am satisfied that Applicant has
both feet firmly planted in the United States and his ties to this country are strong and
will become even stronger in the future. Any security risk or concern presented by his
ties to the Czech Republic is outweighed and overcome by his much stronger family
and employment ties to the United States. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and
evaluating the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,  I conclude Applicant has30
mitigated the foreign influence security concern. Accordingly, I conclude he has met his
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
