KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence. 
Applicant failed to demonstrate that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence in his analysis of the
mitigating conditions.  Hearing Office decisions are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges
or on the Board.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 12-07735.a1
DATE: 06/12/2013
DATE: June 12, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-07735
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Gabriel Pene, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 3, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 29, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.  
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in May 1996 and
received a discharge of $188,000 of unsecured debts in August of that year.  He accumulated 15
delinquent debts totaling more than $27,000 since 1996.  Applicant owned a plumbing business that
was not successful, and his daughter misused his credit cards.  Applicant has satisfied some of the
debts with accumulated payments of $3,000.  He has received no financial counseling.  He has a net
monthly remainder after expenses of about $1,400.  He has no money left from his 401(k) to address
his debts. He has satisfied all of his old federal and state tax debts, is current with his mortgage, and
has acquired no new credit cards.
Applicant failed to disclose his failures to pay taxes for tax years 2008 and 2009 on his
security clearance application (SCA).  On the same form he omitted his wage garnishments from
2004 through 2010, and his various delinquent debts. The omissions were made knowingly and
wilfully.  Applicant volunteered the omitted information during his interview, except some liens for
back taxes dating to 1986.         
The Judge concluded: Under Guideline F, Applicant still owes in excess of $13,000 in
delinquent debts and he has not pursued financial counseling nor explored debt repayment programs.
He has no organized budget or plan in effect to resolve his remaining debts.  The evidence is
insufficient to demonstrate that Applicant has mounted good-faith efforts over the 15 years since his
bankruptcy discharge to satisfy his outstanding debts.  Regarding Guideline E, Applicant’s
withholding of material information about his finances and the timing of his corrections are
insufficient to enable him to refute or mitigate the falsification allegations. 
Applicant argues that the Judge did not take into consideration the evidence presented and
that Applicant did, in fact, testify honestly and voluntarily regarding his financial circumstances, and
he produced evidence mitigating the Department’s concerns.  Regarding Guideline F, the incidents
causing the outstanding debts were based on circumstances that are unlikely to occur again (sole
proprietor, student loan debt); he had demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay overdue debts; and
he now lives well within his means.  Regarding Guideline E, he states that the omissions from his
SCA were the result of inattention in completing the form and his complicated financial history.  He
argues that a conclusion that some facts were mistaken or forgotten in the moment is a more
reasonable conclusion than Applicant admitting a large portion of his delinquencies but intentionally
concealing a small fraction of them.  Applicant’s assertions do not establish error on the part of the
Judge.  
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he or she
specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).
Applicant fails to overcome these presumptions.  Applicant’s arguments appear to go more toward
the weight that the Judge assigned to the evidence.  Applicant cites to numerous facts that he asserts
work in his favor, including the length of time since his bankruptcy, the circumstances of the failed
3
business that prompted the bankruptcy, and actions Applicant undertook recently to address his
outstanding debt.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to
make a favorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25157at 2 (App. Bd. Apr.
4, 2008).  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether
the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had a lengthy and serious
history of not meeting financial obligations   He noted that despite some progress, at the time of the
hearing, Applicant still had a significant amount of overdue indebtedness.  Applicant was still
without a plan to pay off major student loans and two remaining consumer debts.  In light of the
foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still
ongoing.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-07747 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).  A review of the Judge’s
decision reveals that, regarding Guideline F, the Judge listed the potentially applicable mitigating
conditions and then discussed several components of those factors in his analysis.  The Judge found
in favor of Applicant as to a number of the Guideline F allegations.  However, the Judge offered a
narrative explanation as to why the disqualifying conduct under Guideline F was not fully
mitigated.  The Board concludes that the Judge appropriately weighed the Guideline F mitigating
evidence against the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct. 
Regarding Guideline E, Applicant’s arguments on appeal focus on the disclosures Applicant
made to an interviewing agent after submission of the SCA, and the complicated nature of
Applicant’s finances.  The SOR alleged three falsifications of Applicant’s SCA, wherein Applicant
answered all questions in the financial section in the negative, and he did not disclose any part of
his delinquent debt history.  Applicant’s later disclosures, though relevant, were not of a nature to
compel the Judge to conclude that Applicant’s SCA omissions were the product of carelessness or
inadvertence, nor were the disclosures of sufficient strength in terms of mitigation so as to require
a favorable outcome from the Judge.  The Judge found omissions regarding tax delinquencies (SOR
allegation 2.a.) against Applicant, but resolved the other two falsification allegations in his favor.
In support of his appeal, Applicant points to decisions by the Hearing Office which he argues
support his request for a favorable determination.  The Board gives due consideration to those cases.
However, each case “must be decided upon its own merits.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶2(b).  Nothing
in the decisions cited by Applicant demonstrate error on the part of the Judge in this case.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
4
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
