 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05543 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq. 
 
 
June 21, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Without a need to know, Applicant downloaded proprietary information from his 
company computer and his company network onto a thumb drive after accepting an 
employment offer from a competing company. Security concerns under Guidelines M 
and E were not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2012, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines M, J, and E. The SOR 
further informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 5, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 29, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 9, 
 
2 
 
2013, scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2013. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The matter reconvened on May 22, 2013, and June 6, 2013, to allow the 
parties to complete their cases. The Government called three witnesses and offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through D. AE A, AE B, and AE D were admitted without objection. AE C was 
excluded. (Tr. 335.) Applicant testified on his own behalf and called four witnesses. 
DOHA received the transcripts of the hearings (Tr.) on June 4, 2013, June 5, 2013, and 
June 18, 2013. 
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.b to conform to 
the evidence. This allegation originally read: 
 
b. Security and management personnel from [company] seized the thumb drive 
prior to you leaving work and it was found to contain technical data (strategic 
development plans and two Digital Radio Frequency Memory (DRFM) designs) from 
projects [company] was working on or had worked on which would be useful to a 
competitor during any bidding process. 
 
The Amendment proposed to change this allegation to read: 
 
b. Management personnel from [company] seized the thumb drive prior to you 
leaving work and it was found to contain technical data (strategic development plans 
and two Digital Radio Frequency Memory (DRFM) designs) and other [company] 
proprietary, confidential, private, and non-disclosure files from projects [company] was 
working on which would be useful to a competitor during any bidding and project 
development process. 
 
Further, Department Counsel moved to strike ¶1.c of the SOR in its entirety. 
Applicant had no objection to striking ¶1.c, but did object to the amendment of ¶1.b. I 
granted the motions for amendments. (Tr. 10, 243-245, 443-447.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations. (Answer.) After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is single and has 
no children. He earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering in 1985. (GE 1; Tr. 
343-345, 425.) 
 
 Applicant was employed by a defense contractor (DC-A) from December 2002 to 
July 2010. Applicant became unhappy in his position with DC-A when a new business 
manager position was placed above him in their chain of command. He applied for a job 
 
3 
 
with a competing defense contractor (DC-B). DC-B was run, in part, by a former 
employee of DC-A, who testified on Applicant’s behalf. On July 19, 2010, Applicant 
received a job offer from DC-B. He immediately gave DC-A two-week’s notice of his 
intent to vacate his position. (Tr. 26-29, 102-105, 179-188, 541-544, 554.) 
 
 Unbeknownst to Applicant, his computer was under surveillance by DC-A as the 
result of an internal investigation beginning in early 2010. The information technology 
(IT) director at DC-A, who testified at the hearing on behalf of the Government, utilized 
two different monitoring software programs to track all of Applicant’s key strokes and to 
take screen shots of his monitor every few seconds from early 2010 until after he 
resigned. (Tr. 34-40, 466-477, 497-498, 502-508.) 
 
 Suspicions were raised about Appellant’s activities in May 2010. This was after a 
review of screen shots and key strokes disclosed that Applicant transferred a large 
amount of company proprietary and confidential material, including financial information 
that was outside the scope of Applicant’s employment with DC-A, onto a removable 
drive (thumb drive) over the course of a single day. The President of DC-A testified that 
company policy stated downloads to thumb drives required permission from supervisors 
and required encryption. Applicant’s former manager at DC-A testified Applicant had no 
need to know the information he copied and Applicant lacked permission to copy those 
files to a thumb drive. The transfer was discovered a few days after it was complete, 
when the IT director reviewed the output of the monitoring software. The President of 
DC-A testified that an attorney working with DC-A advised him against confronting 
Applicant without access to the thumb drive, but encouraged him to continue to monitor 
Applicant. The monitoring continued but did not disclose any suspicious activity again 
until July 20, 2010, shortly before Applicant gave his notice. (Tr. 41-50, 113-129, 225-
226, 477-482, 512, 548-552, 568, 590, 594-596, 601-603.) 
 
 The IT director testified that the screen shots and keystroke programs showed 
that on Friday, July 16, 2010, Applicant received an email from the head of DC-B. 
Applicant’s manager at DC-A testified that screenshots and key logs showed on 
Monday, July 19, 2010, Applicant printed his resignation letter. Approximately one 
minute after Applicant sent the resignation letter to a printer, he started to download 
information to a thumb drive. First, he copied proprietary systems files that set out “how 
[DC-A]’s systems department worked, procedures, manpower plans, that sort of thing.” 
(Tr. 555-556.) Then Applicant copied personal information to the thumb drive in a 
separate download. Next, Applicant sent his timecard to a printer. Applicant’s manager 
at DC-A testified that nine minutes later the screen shots showed Applicant downloaded 
“technical form files” to the thumb drive. Those files contained, “hiring plans, some 
technical detail on some of the things we were doing and how we were doing them.” (Tr. 
558.)The files not only came from Applicant’s hard drive, but also from DC-A’s company 
network. Applicant’s manager testified that Applicant had been working on the files, but 
should not have taken them with him when leaving to work for a competitor. The screen 
shots showed Applicant’s manager that Applicant then deleted select portions of the 
technical details from a folder on the thumb drive but retained other portions. After 
Applicant’s downloads were complete, Applicant served the resignation letter to his 
 
4 
 
employer, giving two-weeks’ notice. (Tr. 50-79, 482-487, 553-566, 569-571, 581, 586-
589, 592.) 
 
 After Applicant tendered his resignation letter to DC-A, the management decided 
to check the screenshot and keystroke logs. The logs showed the activity noted above. 
It was near the end of the workday, and the President of DC-A decided that they should 
try to retrieve the thumb drive from Applicant. The President of DC-A headed out to the 
parking lot, where he found Applicant. Two other managers were also present. The 
President of DC-A requested the thumb drive from Applicant. Applicant reached in his 
pocket and surrendered it. Applicant told the President of DC-A that he had only 
downloaded personal information to the thumb drive. (Tr. 55-58, 133-136, 173, 423, 
567, 573-574.) 
 
 The President of DC-A testified the thumb drive was sent to a forensic lab for 
them to document and recover the files contained on the drive. The thumb drive was 
ultimately found to contain both deleted and undeleted proprietary files downloaded in 
May 2010, as well as those files copied on July 19, 2010.1 Both the President of DC-A 
and Applicant’s manager testified that the files contained on the thumb drive would be 
useful to a competitor during any bidding and project development process. (Tr. 58-65, 
158-160, 549.) 
 
 Applicant appeared for work on July 20, 2010, but was told the thumb drive had 
not yet been reviewed. He was given the option of remaining at work or going home. 
Applicant chose to go home. Later, he was notified his position had been terminated 
and he was given an “Employee Departure Notice” that shows Applicant voluntarily 
resigned. (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; Tr. 365, 939-395.) 
 
 The President of DC-A testified he reported the incident to the Defense Security 
Service (DSS). DSS recommended he report the incident to the FBI. He did so. 
Applicant acknowledged that he was contacted by the FBI. He never spoke with the FBI 
agent, but she left a message on his phone. No one from the FBI followed up and he 
never spoke to anyone from the FBI. Applicant was never cited for any criminal or 
security violation. There is no evidence that the FBI conducted a full investigation of 
these allegations. (GE 2; Tr. 66-79, 367.) 
 
 Applicant contends that he did nothing wrong. He testified that he was not 
required to obtain permission every time he used the thumb drive. He called three 
former DC-A employees that testified thumb drives were often used at DC-A.2 Applicant 
asserted that he was using the information downloaded in May 2010 to try to do 
forecasting of manpower needs for employees he managed who did work on the files in 
question.3 Further, he testified he was not aware that when files are deleted, they 
                                                          
1 Witnesses testified that deleted files could be recovered. (Tr. 58-65, 516-517.) 
2 However, Applicant’s witnesses had all terminated their employment with DC-A by 2006. (Tr. 252-256, 
257-261, 281-287.) 
3 This assertion was later rebutted by testimony from the IT director, who testified they had a computer 
program that was designed to complete the forecasting function for them. (Tr. 492-496, 512-514, 523-
526, 530-535, 596-599.) 
 
5 
 
remain on a thumb drive and can be restored until overwritten. Regarding his July 19, 
2010 download, he testified that his intent was to copy only his personal files, but: 
 
Well it was another day for me. I wasn’t that careful on what I was copying 
to the thumb drive. I was looking for personal folders but I didn’t look 
inside the folders and look at subfolders or every single file in every folder 
so it is possible that there were [DC-A] proprietary files there yes. (Tr. 
361.) 
 
 Applicant reported he though he copied only personal music files, his resume, 
and his closing papers from the condo he had purchased. He testified that at the time of 
the download on July 19, 2010, he was still an employee of DC-A, and intended to 
continue to work at DC-A for the remaining two weeks. He acknowledged that there 
probably was proprietary information in the files that he copied that day, but denied 
copying it intentionally. Neither Applicant nor his witnesses believed that information 
from DC-A would have been useful to DC-B, due to the unique designs involved. (GE 2; 
Tr. 346-365, 390-392, 397-398, 402-422, 427-440.) 
 
 Applicant, through his attorney, argued that the Government’s witnesses are not 
credible because they had significant reasons to be biased.4 I do not find the argument 
to be material in determining Applicant’s credibility. I find that Applicant behaved 
wrongly on the day in question. (AE D; Tr. 73-85, 108-113, 148-153, 160-169, 174, 178, 
234, 281-317.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by his friends and colleagues, many of which are 
employed by his current employer. His four witnesses testified that they find Applicant 
reliable and trustworthy. Additionally, seven friends and colleagues wrote letters on 
Applicant’s behalf. Each attested to the high morals and trustworthiness of Applicant. 
(AE B; Tr. 14-18, 245-256, 257-280.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
4 Applicant, through his attorney, alleged the witnesses testifying on behalf of the Government are biased 
against Applicant because he is a key player with their current competitor. Applicant also presented a 
lawsuit between DC-A and DC-B, and offered testimony concerning alleged questionable acts conducted 
by the former President of DC-A, and possibly DC-A itself, in the past. 
 
6 
 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedure, guidelines or regulations pertaining 
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
The President and Applicant’s manager at DC-A credibly testified that by 2010 
their company had a policy restricting the use of thumb drives to “need to know” 
information with the permission of a direct supervisor. Applicant duplicated information 
(media) that he had no need to know, and no permission to download to a thumb drive, 
in direct violation of this policy. Specifically, on July 19, 2010, after receiving an 
employment offer from a competitor, he downloaded company proprietary information 
from his hard drive and from the company network. That thumb drive was seized by DC-
A management and it was found to contain proprietary information. Applicant 
acknowledged he may have downloaded proprietary information on that date, but 
suggested he did it inadvertently. I decided that Applicant’s credibility on this point was 
lacking due to the sequence of events, established the Government witnesses, on his 
last day of employment. He has the burden to rebut the evidence against him, and he 
failed to do so. The above disqualifying condition has been established.  
 
AG ¶ 41 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
 Applicant failed to acknowledge wrong-doing. He has not established that similar 
circumstances are unlikely to recur. Further, his conduct casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. The misuse was a serious event and 
Applicant failed to correct the situation in any manner. None of the above mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
 Appellant’s inappropriate behavior in copying proprietary files belonging to his 
employer, for which he had no need to know, shows that he has a lack of candor and 
exercised questionable judgment. His behavior indicates that he may not properly 
safeguard classified information. AG¶ 16 (d) applies. However, due to the lack of 
evidence on an alleged FBI investigation, I find no disqualifying conditions can be 
applied to SOR ¶ 2.b. 
 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant failed to produce 
sufficient evidence that he acknowledges his misconduct. His violations of IT policy and 
misappropriation of proprietary information were not minor matters, and he has done 
little to show similar inappropriate behavior would not occur. Thus, he continues to 
demonstrate questionable judgment and has left himself open to potential coercion. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant copied company proprietary material without authorization onto a 
thumb drive. An agent from the FBI called Applicant after the incident was reported, but 
no further action was taken. The Government failed to present evidence of a 
substantiated allegation or admission of criminal conduct. It presented no criminal 
statutes that were alleged to have been violated, no records from the FBI, and no court 
records. As a result, I cannot find this disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 
10 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines M, E, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a long history of working in the defense industry, and is respected 
by his colleagues and friends. He performs well at his job. Those are facts that weigh in 
favor of reinstating his security clearance. However, his conduct demonstrated a lack of 
honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness. He failed to provide evidence of sufficient 
remedial action that could assure the Government that similar conduct will not occur in 
the future, or that the potential for coercion or duress is insubstantial.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Use of Information Technology Systems, and 
Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
