 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09686    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a naturalized citizen of 
the United States originally from Afghanistan. The security concerns raised by 
Applicant’s relationships with her sister’s ex-husband, her husband’s brother, and two 
former co-workers who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan are mitigated. 
Clearance is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive,1 on August 22, 2013, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
detailing security concerns under foreign influence guidelines. DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on February 22, 2013. A complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 16, 2013. Applicant timely 
submitted Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A1 through A19, which are admitted without 
objection. The items appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. The case was assigned to me on April 19, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moves to amend the SOR ¶ 1.g to include Applicant’s two 
brothers. The motion is denied. Applicant’s older brother is a naturalized U.S citizen 
who works as a linguist for a federal contractor and holds a security clearance. Her 
younger brother is a U.S. permanent resident, who lives with Applicant’s mother. 
Beyond their existence, Department Counsel presented no evidence showing that 
Applicant’s relationship with either brother raises a security concern. Based on the 
evidence, neither relationship is disqualifying under the foreign influence guideline.2 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was 
approved. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 44, has worked as a linguist for a federal contractor in Afghanistan 
since February 2012. Applicant was born in Afghanistan, a country located in 
southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran borders it on the 
west and Russia on the north. With a population of 18 million people, Afghanistan is 
presently an Islamic Republic that has had a turbulent political history. After the 
Russians withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan 
and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% 
of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies. In October 2001, U.S. 
forces and coalition partners led military operations in the country, forcing the Taliban 
out of power by November 2001. The new democratic government took power in 2004 
                                                          
2 AE A1-2, A15-16.   
 
3 
 
after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. The country’s human rights record 
remains poor. Problems include: extrajudicial killings; widespread official impunity; 
official corruption; violence and societal discrimination against women. Violence is 
rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. No 
section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.3 
 
Applicant became a U.S. naturalized citizen in August 2011. Between 1993 and 
2002, Applicant moved back and forth between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Initially, she 
moved to Pakistan to flee the civil war in Afghanistan after her family home was 
destroyed in a random attack. She returned to Afghanistan in 1997, believing that the 
situation in Afghanistan was improving under the stability of the Taliban rule. Applicant 
and her husband began working for a non-profit organization dedicated to helping 
homeless women and children. Their support of the organization drew the ire of the 
Taliban. Applicant’s husband was arrested by the Taliban in early 2000 and again in 
2001. Before taking her husband away in 2001, the Taliban beat Applicant. After her 
husband escaped captivity, they fled to Pakistan again. In 2002, Applicant returned to 
Afghanistan after applying for a position at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, which she 
started in August 2002. Applicant discussed her contacts with the Taliban in her 
February 2012 counter-intelligence interview. When asked about the threats she 
received from the Taliban, Applicant opined that they were not personal because the 
Taliban indiscriminately threatened anyone who was not part of the organization.4  
 
 Applicant worked as an employee at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul until March 
2003. As a result of her status as an embassy employee, Applicant received a visa to 
enter the United States with two of her three children so that she could obtain medical 
care for her daughter. Applicant decided to stay in the United States permanently. In 
2006, Applicant’s husband and their oldest child also immigrated to the United States as 
political-asylum seekers, thus reuniting the family. Applicant’s husband and her three 
older children are also naturalized U.S. citizens. Her youngest child is a U.S. citizen by 
birth. They all live together in the home Applicant and her husband own together. 
Applicant’s mother, her two brothers, and her three sisters also immigrated to the United 
States. Applicant’s mother and older brother are naturalized U.S. citizens. Her younger 
brother and her sisters, two of whom are married, are living in the United States with 
their families as permanent residents. One of her brothers-in-law also works as a 
linguist for a federal contractor.5  
 
 Applicant admits that two of her friends,6 her sister’s ex-husband, and her 
husband’s brother, are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. The friends alleged in ¶¶ 
                                                          
3 GE 11. 
 
4 GE 4-5, 8. 
 
5 GE 2, 4, 8; AE A1-A16. 
 
6 The SOR alleges several friends, but from the disclosures Applicant made on her security clearance 
application and her counter-intelligence questionnaires, there are only two friends identified as being 
 
4 
 
1.h and 1.i are her former co-workers from the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. She maintains 
contact with them only through Facebook. She has not had any direct contact with 
either friend since she immigrated to the United States in 2003. Applicant does not 
maintain contact with her sister’s ex-husband, who works as an engineer, nor has she 
had any contact with her husband’s brother since 2006. Applicant learned from other 
members of her husband’s family that her husband’s brother works for the Afghan 
government. She has no first-hand knowledge of his job details.7  
  
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s father (¶1.b), parents-in-law (¶¶ 1.d – 1.e), and 
youngest sister (1.h.) are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. All are deceased. She 
reported their deaths on her security clearance application and counter-intelligence 
questionnaires. The Government concedes that these deceased relatives are not a 
security concern.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. The friend alleged in ¶1.i, is also one of the two friends alleged in ¶ 
1.h. 
 
7 GE 2; AE A1-2. 
 
8 GE 4, 9-10.  
 
5 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s relationships with her husband, son, mother, two brothers, three 
sisters, and two brothers-in-laws are not disqualifying under the foreign influence 
guideline. These relatives’ status as either naturalized U.S. citizens or permanent 
residents, living in the United States, predates the SOR. However, the security concerns 
raised by Applicant’s relationships with her sister’s ex-husband, her husband’s brother, 
and her two friends that are citizens and residents of Afghanistan require greater 
scrutiny. “Foreign contacts . . . may be a security concern if the individual has divided 
loyalties . . ., may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”9  
 
While the mere possession of close ties with foreign family members or friends is 
not disqualifying as a matter of law, a close relationship with even one person living in a 
foreign country, is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. A close relationship with a 
person who is a resident and citizen of a foreign country can be disqualifying if the 
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure or coercion; or if the relationship could create a potential conflict of interest 
between the applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology, and his 
desire to help a foreign person.10 Evaluating the nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record is essential to this 
calculus. Given the perilous conditions in the country caused by the operation of the 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 6.  
 
10 AG ¶¶ 7(a) – (b). 
 
6 
 
Taliban – which Applicant has experienced firsthand, the widespread corruption within 
the government, the poor human rights record, the risk of terrorism, and Applicant’s 
brother-in-law’s employment in the Afghan government, a heightened risks exits. 
 
However, Applicant has provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by these relationships. The status of Applicant’s two friends as 
employees of the U.S Embassy in Kabul makes it unlikely that these relationships will 
cause her to choose between the competing interests of the United States and 
Afghanistan.11 While the same cannot be applied to her husband’s brother’s position, 
this relationship is mitigated – as is Applicant’s relationship with her sister’s ex-husband 
-- by the lack of contact between them. Given the paucity of contact, there is little 
likelihood that either of these relationships serves as a potential source of exploitation 
for Applicant.12  
 
Most important, Applicant has deep ties to the United States. She previously 
worked as an employee at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. That job facilitated Applicant’s 
immigration to the United States, where she was followed by her immediate family. She 
and her husband own a home in the United States, but own no property in Afghanistan. 
Her brother and one of her brothers-in-law also work as linguists for a federal contactor. 
Based on the evidence, I find that Applicant will resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the United States. Also any concerns raised by Applicant’s previous interaction with 
the Taliban are mitigated by the passage of time, the cessation of the conduct that drew 
the Taliban’s attention and the fact the family members, whose well-being would most 
likely serve as a potential source of vulnerability, are living in the United States.13  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant does not have divided 
loyalties between the United States and Afghanistan. I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated the foreign influence concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 8(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 8(c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
