1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-04903
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 17, 2013
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on May 13, 2011. (Item 5.) On September 14, 2012, the Department of Defense
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
H (Drug Involvement), J (Criminal Conduct), and G (Alcohol Consumption) concerning
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 3, 2012. (Item 3.) He
subsequently submitted an undated Answer to the SOR, and requested a decision be
made without a hearing.  (Item 4.) Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM) to Applicant on December 6, 2012. Applicant received the FORM on
December 20, 2012, and was given 30 days to submit any additional information.
Applicant elected not to submit any additional information. The case was assigned to
Item 6 of the FORM is a Report of Investigation (ROI) from the Office of Personnel Management consisting1
of a Personal Subject Interview of Applicant. Section 5 of EO 10865, and paragraph E3.1.20,  Additional
Procedural Guidance of the Directive, state that an ROI requires authentication before it can be considered.
Authentication can consist of Applicant affirmatively adopting the ROI in writing. Such authentication or
adoption is not present in this case. Accordingly, I have not considered Item 6 in making this Decision.
“SUBOXONE Film is a narcotic medication indicated for the maintenance treatment of opioid dependence,2
available only by prescription, and must be taken under a doctor's care as prescribed.” (Reckitt Benckiser
Pharmaceuticals, Home http://www.suboxone.com/ (accessed June 13, 2013).) (Emphasis in original.)  
“Methadone . . . is a synthetic opioid. It is used medically as an analgesic and a maintenance anti-addictive3
and reductive preparation for use by patients with opioid dependency.” (W ikipedia, Methadone
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methadone (accessed June 13, 2013).) (Emphasis in original.)
2
me on February 19, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 41, and married. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment. Applicant admitted all
of the allegations in the SOR, with the exception of allegations 1.b, and 3.e. Those
admissions are findings of fact. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the
following findings of fact.1
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he used illegal drugs.
1.a. Applicant admits he purchased and used heroin in 2010 as well as earlier.
He further states in his Answer, “Admit used until I could get on suboxone [prescription]
and less like opiate and less habit forming than methadone.” In Section 23 of his e-QIP
(Item 5) he admits using illegal drugs and goes on to state that he was prescribed
suboxone in January 2011.2
1.b. Applicant denied that he had purchased and used prescription painkillers in
2010. In his Answer he stated, “Disagree never purchased may have been [prescribed]
or given.” There is no evidence that Applicant misused prescription painkillers. I find this
allegation to be unproved due to lack of evidence and it is found for Applicant.
1.c. Applicant admits that he was on a methadone program from 2002 to
December 2009. He further states in his Answer, “Admit what is wrong with getting
help.” In Section 23 of his e-QIP (Item 5) he admits to a methadone prescription in
January 2010 in connection with the hospitalization discussed in allegation 3.a.3
3
1.d. Applicant admits that he received drug treatment counseling from January to
July 2011 where he was diagnosed with drug abuse. In his Answer he stated, “Admit
again what is wrong with getting help and I think this was before 2011.”
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct)
Government alleges under this paragraph that Applicant has engaged in criminal
conduct.
2.a. Applicant admits that he was arrested in 1990 and charged with armed
robbery, assault to commit armed robbery, and conspiracy. He plead Nolo Contendere
and received a ten year suspended sentence with five years probation. In his Answer
Applicant circled the word “conspiracy.” He went on to say, “I admit but no [weapons]
were used and I was not involved with the robbery I was just in the car when they were
caught.”
2.b. Applicant admits that he was arrested for illegally discharging a firearm in
May 1996. In his Answer Applicant states, “I admit I was shootin[g] tin cans in the
woods.”
Paragraph 3 (Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he uses intoxicants to excess.
3.a. Applicant admits that he was involuntarily admitted in December 2009 to a
state hospital correctional facility, pursuant to state law, for drug and alcohol treatment.
He was diagnosed with chronic and habitual substance abuse.
3.b. Applicant admits that he received treatment for depression and alcohol
abuse from a licensed mental health counselor for four months in 2010. He further
admits that his prognosis for recover was termed as “Fair.”
3.c. Applicant admits that he was arrested and charged with Driving Under the
Influence of Alcohol in June 1996. In his e-QIP at Section 22 he states that the charge
was “Dismissed.”
3.d. Applicant admits that he was arrested and charged with Driving Under the
Influence of Alcohol in June 1991. He plead guilty, was fined and lost his drivers license.
In his Answer he further states, “I admit but someone else was driving my car and left I
[thought] that was [dismissed] but I did [lose] my license.”
3.e. Applicant denied using alcohol from age 12 to the present, sometimes to the
point of intoxication. He states in his Answer, “Disagree not to point of intoxication deny
some ones opinion.”
4
As a concluding statement in his Answer, Applicant says:
Clearance or no [clearance] I no longer use illegal drugs and my alcohol
use is at an all time low and in no way interferes with my work
performance or [attendance]. I have a child on the way I just want to work
pay my taxes and support my family I enjoy working for [his employer] and
I hope to retire here. I am a hard worker and give my 100% every day.
Applicant provided no additional evidence concerning the quality of his
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures.
He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility,
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a
hearing. 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
5
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
6
 Applicant admits using heroin for some period of time ending in 2010. I accept as
true his statement that he is not currently using illegal drugs. He states that he is
currently on a suboxone regimen with a doctor. Before that he took methadone for many
years. However, as stated in allegation 3.a, he had to be involuntarily committed to a
state hospital for drug and alcohol treatment in 2009. He also states that he underwent
drug counseling in 2011. He submitted no evidence that he is currently in a drug
treatment program, other than taking the suboxone. 
I have studied all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation; and
(d) satisfactory completion of prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional. 
Applicant offered insufficient evidence that would support mitigation under AG ¶¶
26 (a), (b), or (d). Applicant elected not to submit any written information concerning his
treatment, including a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.
Without such evidence it is not possible to find that he has a demonstrated intent not to
use drugs, or that he has satisfactorily completed his drug treatment. Enough time has
not passed for me to say with any degree of confidence that he will not use heroin or
other illegal substances in the future. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG & 30:      
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
7
(b) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
As stated above, Applicant was arrested for criminal offenses in 1990 and 1996.
The 1990 arrest was for a very serious offense. Both of the disqualifying conditions
apply to his conduct.
I have examined the mitigating conditions and there is one that applies under AG
¶ 32:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.
His last arrest was over sixteen years ago, and there is no indication of a current
problem with law enforcement authorities. He was 18 years old when the robbery-
related incident took place. Under the particular circumstances of this case, he has
mitigated the security significance of his criminal conduct. Paragraph 2 is found for
Applicant.
Paragraph 3 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out
in AG & 21:      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
Applicant admitted that he used alcohol from the age of 12 to the present, though
he denied using it to intoxication.  That denial is undercut by the fact of his two alcohol-
related arrests for DUI in 1991 and 1996. He also had alcohol and drug treatment in
2009 and 2010.
The following disqualifying condition apply to this case under AG ¶ 22:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
I have examined the potential mitigating conditions under this paragraph and find
none of them apply. AG ¶ 23(a) states that it can be mitigating when, “so much time has
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment.” In addition, AG ¶ 23(b) states that
8
it is mitigating where, “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an
alcohol abuser).” Finally, AG ¶ 23(c) states that it can be mitigating where, “the
individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment
program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory
progress.” 
In this case Applicant has used alcohol to excess for many years. While his
alcohol related arrests are in the far past, over sixteen years ago, he continues to use
alcohol. In addition, he had involuntary alcohol and drug treatment in 2009, as well as
alcohol treatment in 2010. It is Applicant’s burden to show that his long-standing and
serious alcohol abuse was a thing of the past. He did not do so. Paragraph 3 is found
against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a drug user, and abuser
of alcohol. These situations may be under control, but Applicant did not present
sufficient evidence to show that. Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), Applicant’s conduct is recent.
Based on the state of the record, I cannot find that there have been permanent
behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I find that
there is the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)), and
that there is a high likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use,
and alcohol consumption at this time. 
9
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1, and 3 of the Government's Statement of
Reasons. As stated above, Paragraph 2 is found for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.e.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
