 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04597 
                                                                      )                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                             Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 17, 2013, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, which she signed and dated 
on March 20, 2013. She declined a hearing and requested a decision on the record. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 29, 2013. The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9. On April 3, 2013, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
April 9, 2013. Her response was due on May 9, 2013. Applicant timely filed additional 
information in response to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object to the 
information submitted. On May 24, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I 
marked Applicant’s response to the FORM as Item A and entered it in the record. 
 
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶ 1.a.). In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the allegation. Her admission is entered as a finding of fact. (Item 1; Item 2.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and the Applicant. In addition to Applicant’s response to the FORM and her answer to 
the SOR, the record evidence includes Applicant’s 2011 e-QIP; her responses to DOHA 
interrogatories;1 and her credit reports of December 3, 2011; July 27, 2012; and 
January 4, 2013. The credit reports establish the debt alleged on the SOR. (See Items 4 
through 9; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is 64 years old, married, and the employee of a government contractor. 
Since 1985, she has served as president of a company that carries out government 
contracts. Since 2006, she has also owned a small carry-out restaurant. Applicant was 
first awarded a security clearance in 2001. (Item 5.) 
 
 Section 26 on the e-QIP Applicant completed in November 2011 asked if she 
was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. Applicant responded “No.” 
Applicant’s credit report of December 2011 showed she was over 120 days past due on 
her home equity account and owed $23,271 on a total balance of $214,330. When she 
was asked about this delinquency by an authorized investigator in December 2011, 
Applicant stated that she was not aware of the debt because her husband handled all 
financial matters relating to their business and their home. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 9.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that, as of January 17, 2013, Applicant was over 120 days past 
due on her home equity line of credit account and owed $64,128. Applicant’s credit 
report of January 4, 2013 confirms the delinquency. (Item 1; Item 7.) 
 
 In her answer, Applicant explained that her husband was pursuing a new 
business venture, lacked sufficient capital, and used the home equity account and credit 
                                            
1
Applicant was interviewed under oath by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on January 30, 2012. On December 11, 2012, in response to DOHA interrogatories, 
Applicant signed a notarized statement in which she agreed that the investigator’s summary accurately 
reflected the information she provided in her interview. She also provided additional information (Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
cards to pay the company’s key employees. She stated that three years ago, her 
husband found a potential investor who had expressed a willingness to invest ten million 
dollars in his venture, but the investor had not followed through and provided the 
money. Applicant stated she had faith in her husband and hoped for a good resolution 
in the future. She stated that she and her husband were seeking to lower their monthly 
mortgage payments and applying for a reverse mortgage to increase their cash flow. 
(Item 4.)      
 
 Applicant’s husband provided a letter, dated December 11, 2012, stating that he 
was applying for a reverse mortgage. He stated that he had a mortgage on his home of 
$231,772 with one creditor; owed $153,061 on another mortgage account; and owed 
$22,171 in credit card debt. He reported that his house was valued at $800,000. (Item 
6.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband also provided a copy of settlement offer from the creditor 
holding his home mortgage. The creditor identified the amount currently due on the 
home mortgage as $437,319.The creditor offered to settle the debt for a one-time 
payment of $153,061, provided it was paid by September 20, 2012. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant was asked to respond to DOHA’s financial interrogatories by providing 
information on a form identified as a personal financial statement. However, she failed 
to provide the information requested on the form. As a consequence, the record is 
devoid of information on Applicant’s monthly family income, her monthly living 
expenses, her financial obligations and the amounts paid on them each month, and her 
assets such as savings, stocks and bonds, and real estate. The record does not reflect 
that Applicant has had financial counseling.  (Item 6.)   
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a letter, dated May 2, 2013, stating 
that she and her husband had applied for a reverse mortgage, and she anticipated the 
reverse mortgage agreement would go into effect before the end of June 2013. She 
attached to the letter a Form 1099-C showing that on October 11, 2012, her mortgage 
debt of $429,805 had been discharged. (Item A.)   
   
  
                     Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
4 
 
 
   When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
The record reflects that Applicant is responsible for a home equity line of credit   
debt that was over 120 days past due in the amount of $64,128. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquency. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20(d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20(e)). 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquency. She provided information 
showing her mortgage debt of $429,805 had been discharged, but she failed to show 
 
6 
 
 
how paying that debt impacted a delinquency of over $64,000 on her home equity line 
of credit. Moreover, she failed to provide information about her current family income, 
living expenses, debt payments, and assets. Without this information, it is not possible 
to assess the impact of the discharge of her mortgage debt on Applicant’s total financial 
situation. I conclude that Applicant has failed to demonstrate that her financial 
obligations have been addressed and her financial vulnerability resolved. Accordingly, I 
conclude that none of the mitigating conditions under the financial considerations 
adjudicative guideline apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of 
unresolved debt. She failed to complete a personal financial statement. The record does 
not demonstrate that she has sufficient resources to avoid financial delinquency in the 
future. 
 
 As the president of a firm that carries out government contracting, Applicant has 
a duty to ensure the stability and financial integrity of her company. Her assertions that 
she has no knowledge of the company’s financial status and obligations reflect poorly 
on her credibility. Applicant failed to show that she possesses the reliability, judgment, 
and trustworthiness of a person who can be trusted with classified and sensitive 
information. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns about her financial considerations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                       Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.:                           Against Applicant 
  
                                                Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
