1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-10882
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 27, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On January 16, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E for Applicant.
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On February 13, 2013, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.)
On March 19, 2013, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered eight documentary exhibits. (Items 1-8.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on May 4, 2013. Applicant submitted no
documents. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on May 31, 2013.
2
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 35 years old. She is unmarried and has no children. She graduated
from high school in 1996. Applicant served in the United States Navy from 1997 to 2010
and received an Honorable Discharge. Applicant is employed by a defense contractor,
and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the
defense sector.
Paragraph 1 Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 7 allegations (1.a. through 1.g.) regarding overdue, unpaid debts,
under Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be discussed below in the same
order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,430. Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she is making payments of $137 a
month. (Item 3.) Applicant did attach copies of checks to her RSOR, showing three
payments of $305.90 to one creditor and another payment of $77 to the same creditor,
a creditor that is not listed on the SOR. (Item 3.) However, Applicant furnished no
independent evidence to show how many payments have been paid to this creditor, to
prove that any payments have been made to this creditor, or to explain how much she
contends that this debt has been reduced.  Based on this lack of evidence, I find that
this debt is still outstanding. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,290. Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she is making payment of $305 a
month. She stated that February 16, 2013, will be her last payment. (Item 3.) No
independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved
or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,187. Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she is making payment of $100 a
month. (Item 3.)  No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding. 
 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,721. Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she has contacted the creditor, and
they have talked about an agreement to pay $1,344 down and $150 a month. (Item 3.)
No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding. 
3
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,699. Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she is making payment of $100 a
month. (Item 3.) The Credit Report shows that this debt is overdue by Applicant. (Item 9
at 9.)  No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has
been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding. 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $150,000 on a
mortgage account that is in foreclosure status. Applicant admitted this debt in her
RSOR, and she wrote that her house did go into foreclosure and has been sold. She
contended that she does not owe anything on this debt. She also wrote that she could
not afford the down payment requested by the creditor. (Item 3.) No independent
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.
I find that this debt is still outstanding. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $8,200. Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she is making payments of $100 a
month. (Item 3.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding. 
In Applicant’s subject interview, she averred that she was unemployed from
October 2010 to July 2011. She also said that the debts were beyond her control, and
she did not have financial counseling or debt consolidation services. Finally, she
indicated that her current financial situation is improving. (Item 8.)
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The SOR alleges that Applicant furnished incomplete, untruthful information on a
Security Clearance Application (SCA) that she completed and certified on November
30, 2012. (Item 4.) Applicant answered, “No,” to the questions in section 26, under
“Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts,” and she did not include any of the debts
listed on the SOR as allegation 1.a. through 1.g. In her subject interview, Applicant
explained her failure to list any of her overdue debts on the SCA by stating, that either
she did not have the information with her when completing the questionnaire, or it was
due to an oversight. (Item 8.)
I find that Applicant should have given affirmative responses to these questions
and included all of the seven delinquent debts listed on the SOR. While Applicant may
not have been aware of all of the overdue debts, it is inconceivable that she was not
aware of any of these debts. Therefore, I find that Applicant  knowingly  furnished
untruthful information to the Government. 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debts.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As
reviewed above, Applicant claimed that her poor finances were because of a period of
unemployment. However, no independent evidence was introduced to establish that
Applicant has resolved any of her overdue debt, or acted responsibly. Therefore, I do
not find that this potentially mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case,
nor do I find that any other mitigating condition applies.
I conclude that until Applicant is able to significantly reduce her overdue debt,
and show that she is currently financially stable, she has not mitigated the financial
concerns of the Government.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:  
      Conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
an candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
6
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.  
With respect to Guideline E, I find that Applicant knew or should have known of
her extensive overdue debts that had been acquired over several years, and she should
have included at least some of these overdue debts when she completed her SCA.
Because of her lack of honesty and candor regarding very clearly written questions, I
find that Applicant did intend to mislead the Government.
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. If such an individual intentionally falsifies material facts, it
is extremely difficult to conclude that she nevertheless possesses the judgment and
honesty, necessary for an individual given a clearance.
In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I conclude that
because of Applicant’s “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire” that ¶ 16(a) applies against Applicant. I
find no mitigating conditions can be applied. I, therefore, resolve Guideline E against
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating condition is
applicable under Guideline F or E. Therefore, I find that the record evidence leaves me
with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
7
security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.g.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
