 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10609 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 30, 2012, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 27, 2013. The FORM was mailed to 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant and he received it on April 26, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted his 
response to the FORM on April 27, 2013 (Response 1-5). The case was assigned to me 
on June 10, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He was born in Afghanistan and came to the United 
States in 1986. He became a U.S. citizen in1994. He is married and has three children. 
He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since May 2012. The 
record contains no information on his educational background. He was unemployed 
between January and May 2012. From March 2000 to January 2012, he was self-
employed as a commercial business owner.1  
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by credit reports from May 2012 and 
August 2012. The SOR sets out six debts amounting to about $51,639. Applicant’s 
finances became a concern in late 2011 and early 2012. His business slowed down 
because of the introduction of four similar businesses in the same area. He used credit 
cards to finance his business during this period and was unable to repay the debts. 
After his business closed, he was unemployed for several months until he started at his 
current contractor position in May 2012.2  
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card account in the amount 
of $10,810. Applicant provided documentation that he settled this debt in April 2013. 
Although the account number does not match, the credit reports only list one account 
for this creditor. I find that there is substantial evidence that this debt was resolved.3 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card account in the amount 
of $6,608. Applicant presented evidence that the creditor sent him an Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) Form 1099-C for this debt. However, the account numbers do not match, 
and Applicant had more than one account with this creditor. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a credit card account in the amount 
of $8,889. Applicant presented evidence showing that he entered a stipulated 
settlement with this creditor, which included monthly payments in the amount of about 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 3-4. 
 
3 Items 5-7; Response 1-2. 
 
4 Item 5-7; Response 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
$476 beginning in July 2012 and concluding in June 2013. Although there are notations 
on the settlement page apparently indicating payment confirmation numbers, no actual 
proof of payments are included. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a credit card account in the amount 
of $9,885. Applicant provided documentation that he settled this debt in February 2013. 
Although the account number does not match, the credit reports only list one delinquent 
account for this creditor. I find that there is substantial evidence that this debt was 
resolved.6 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are for two credit card 
accounts with the same creditor in the amount of $6,519 and $8,928. Applicant 
presented no evidence concerning these debts. The dates of the last action associated 
with these accounts were in April and May 2011. These debts are unresolved.7 
 
 Applicant has deployed to hostile areas in support of U.S. forces. No further 
information is available about his activities.8 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
5 Item 5-7; Response 3. 
 
6 Item 5-7; Response 4. 
 
7 Item 5. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 With the exception of the settled debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d, all of 
Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient evidence to show that 
the debts are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant provided evidence that his business went broke and that he was unemployed 
for a time, which contributed to his financial problems. However, in order for this 
mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in 
light of the circumstances. Although he recently contacted two creditors to settle those 
debts, he provided insufficient evidence to show he acted on the remaining debts. This 
demonstrates a lack of responsible behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
Applicant failed to present evidence of financial counseling, and while two debts were 
settled, there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved 
or under control because several debts remain unpaid. There is no evidence that he has 
made a good-faith effort to pay the remaining debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) only 
partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
the U.S. military in hostile territory and the impact his business failure and subsequent 
unemployment had on his debt situation. However, he has not shown a track record of 
financial stability. The record lacks evidence that Applicant has made an overall good-
faith effort to resolve his debts. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.d:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
