 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 13-00200 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her possession and past 
use of a Nigerian passport. She is a U.S. citizen and only acquired a Nigerian passport 
to protect her U.S. passport and identity from potential compromise upon traveling to 
Nigeria to pay her final respects to her parents and to attend her sister’s wedding. She 
surrendered the Nigerian passport to her facility security officer and had it destroyed. 
Applicant also mitigated the concerns arising from her connections to her family 
members living in Nigeria, as she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
arising from such connections in favor of the United States. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline 
C (Foreign Preference). On April 7, 2013, Applicant timely answered the SOR and 
requested an expedited hearing to establish her eligibility for access to classified 
information (Answer).  
 
 
2 
 
 
On May 13, 2013, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on May 23, 2013. Per Applicant’s 
request for an expedited hearing, I scheduled her hearing for May 31, 2013.1 
 
 Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2 and Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s proposed summary of facts regarding Nigeria 
and its relationship with the United States was marked as Gx. 3, but not admitted. The 
seven U.S. Government documents referenced in Gx.3 were considered in assessing 
the security concerns at issue and relied upon in setting forth the relevant, 
administrative facts regarding Nigeria. Applicant appeared at the hearing and testified. I 
granted her request for additional time to submit documents post-hearing. She timely 
submitted Ax. B – J and they were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 10, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 38, is a U.S. citizen by birth. After Applicant completed kindergarten, 
her parents decided to move the family to their home country, Nigeria. Applicant grew 
up in Nigeria, but her family routinely visited the United States during school breaks and 
holidays. She always considered herself an American living abroad and never 
assimilated into Nigerian society and culture. After graduating from high school, 
Applicant was accepted by a U.S. college and returned to the United States. Her 
parents were unable to pay for college, so she worked part time while going to school. 
Her parents routinely tried to convince her to return to Nigeria, but she decided to 
remain in the United States. (Tr. at 27, 31-32, 34, 48-49, 57-61) 
 
After graduating from college, Applicant married, secured a job, and started a 
family in the United States. She has two children, ages 10 and 11, who were born and 
raised in the United States. In 2008, she earned her master’s degree while working full 
time. In 2012, she was offered an engineering position with a Defense contractor, for 
which she needs a security clearance. (Tr. at 27-28, 41, 49; Gx. 1; Ax. F – G, Ax. J)  
 
 Applicant’s father and mother passed away in 2005 and 2010, respectively. (Gx. 
1) She traveled to Nigeria to visit them when they were sick and to attend their funerals. 
She was concerned that her U.S. passport and identity might be compromised in her 
travels to Nigeria, so she applied for and was granted a Nigerian passport. She only 
used the Nigerian passport to pay her final respects to her parents and attend her 
sister’s wedding. (Tr. at 29-30, 43-44, 56-57)  
 
Applicant voluntarily disclosed her Nigerian passport and travels to Nigeria on 
her security clearance application. (Gx. 1) During her background investigation, 
Applicant indicated her willingness to surrender her Nigerian passport if required as a 
precondition for a security clearance. (Gx. 2) She subsequently surrendered her 
                                                          
1 Applicant waived notice of the hearing at least 15 days prior to it being held. Directive, 
Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.8. (Tr. at 9-10) 
 
3 
 
 
Nigerian passport to her facility security officer, who destroyed it. (Ax. A) She credibly 
testified that she has no intent to renew her Nigerian passport. (Tr. at 57) 
 
 Applicant has two brothers and a sister. One of her brothers is a U.S. citizen, 
who lives and works in the United States. Her younger brother and sister are Nigerian 
citizens, living in Nigeria. Both were granted U.S. legal permanent residency status and 
are awaiting admission to the United States. Applicant frequently communicates with 
her siblings and provides her sister financial support. (Tr. at 28-29, 32-40; Gx. 1 – 2) 
 
 Applicant’s husband was born in Nigeria, immigrated to the United States in the 
early 1990s, and became a U.S. citizen in 2004. Applicant’s mother-in-law is originally 
from Nigeria, recently became a U.S. citizen, and is living in the United States with one 
of her daughters. (Tr. at 44; Gx. 2; Ax. D) Applicant’s brother-in-law (husband’s brother) 
is a Nigerian citizen. He has been granted U.S. legal permanent residency status. He 
recently visited Applicant and her spouse, in preparation for his imminent move to the 
United States. (Tr. at 45-46, 55-56)  
 
Applicant has several other distant relatives in Nigeria, but has not spoken to any 
of them in several years. She has not maintained active contact with any of her grade 
school friends from Nigeria. (Tr. at 41-42, 47) None of Applicant’s family works for the 
Nigerian government and none, except her husband, are aware that she is seeking a 
U.S. security clearance as part of her job. (Tr. at 36-37; Gx. 2) 
 
 Applicant and her husband own their home in the United States. Her husband 
works for a major U.S. company, and their combined yearly income is about $200,000. 
She has a pension from a prior job with a U.S. employer and approximately $40,000 in 
her employer-sponsored 401(k) retirement account. Applicant and her husband have no 
bank accounts, properties, or assets in Nigeria. They are actively involved in their local 
community through their church.(Tr. at 46-47, 49-54; Ax. C, Ax. H – I)   
 
 Applicant is well respected at her current job and her program manager notes 
that she has “excellent work ethic.” (Ax. B) She received an exceptional rating on her 
performance review from her prior job. (Ax. E) 
 
Administrative Facts – Nigeria 
 
 Nigeria gained its independence from Britain in 1960. Since gaining its 
independence, Nigeria has been plagued by recurring outbreaks of sectarian, ethnic, 
and communal violence.  
 
Nigeria is a federal republic, with a political structure similar to the United States. 
It is a key power in Africa due to its size and political and economic role in the region. It 
is Sub-Saharan Africa’s second largest economy and a major crude oil producer. 
Despite its oil wealth, Nigeria remains underdeveloped. Democratic and economic 
progress in Nigeria is challenged by poor governance, entrenched corruption, internal 
conflict, ineffective service delivery, and pervasive poverty.  
 
4 
 
 
 The United States considers its strategic relationship with Nigeria to be among 
the most important on the African continent. Relations between the two nations have 
steadily improved since 1999, with the resumption of basic democracy in Nigeria. An 
estimated one million Nigerians and Nigerian-Americans live, study, and work in the 
United States; while over 25,000 Americans live and work in Nigeria. 
 
 The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel to Nigeria, 
particularly during the holiday season, and continues to recommend that U.S. citizens 
avoid all but essential travel to a number of states within Nigeria where the risk of 
kidnappings, robberies, and other armed attacks is high. A militant, Islamist terrorist 
group, based in the north of the country, poses a significant concern. Serious human 
rights violations were committed by terrorist and there were reports of human rights 
abuses by security forces.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
 
5 
 
 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
An individual’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign influence 
concern. However, there is no per se rule against applicants who have such ties. 
Instead, in addressing the foreign influence concern, an administrative judge must 
consider the foreign government involved; the intelligence gathering history of that 
government; the country’s human rights record; and the presence of terrorist activity in 
that country.2  
 
 Applicant’s connections to family members in Nigeria, in light of the country 
conditions and threat of terrorism in Nigeria, raise a heightened risk of foreign influence. 
This evidence also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-04980 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2012).  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s foreign familial connections and finding of heightened risk does not 
end the analysis, because AG ¶ 8 lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the 
concern. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are relevant: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. Applicant is a U.S. citizen who decided, upon 
reaching the age of majority, that she wanted to return and live in her country of birth, 
the United States. She earned her bachelor’s and master’s degrees in the United 
States. She worked the entire time while going to school and, although it would have 
been far easier, both financially and personally, to return to Nigeria, she stayed in the 
United States to pursue her lifelong dreams and ambitions. She has now lived in the 
United States the majority of her life. She started a family in the United States, and all 
her property and assets are in the United States. Beyond her immediate family 
members, Applicant has several close family members and friends in the United States. 
Her remaining close family members in Nigeria are waiting to lawfully immigrate to the 
United States, which they plan to make their home.  
 
 Furthermore, Nigeria is a democracy and strategic partner of the United States. 
Her foreign family members do not reside in any of the areas in Nigeria listed by the 
U.S. State Department as raising a significant security concern. Accordingly, under this 
unique set of circumstances, it is highly unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interest of her foreign family members and her 
obligation to protect U.S. secrets. More importantly, Applicant established, through her 
deep and longstanding relationships in the United States, that she can be expected to 
resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
 Applicant’s acquisition and use of a Nigerian passport raises this concern and 
also establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship,” to include “possession of a current foreign 
passport.” 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign preference concern. Her acquisition of the 
Nigerian passport was a security-savvy move to prevent the compromise of her U.S. 
passport and identity. She surrendered her Nigerian passport without hesitation and had 
it destroyed, when informed of the potential security concerns. Furthermore, her 
testimony and conduct over the past 21 years demonstrates that she does not have a 
preference for Nigeria or any other foreign country over the United States. Specifically, 
Applicant established the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).3 I incorporate my comments under Guidelines B and C 
herein, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant’s personal character 
and integrity, which are vital matters to be considered in assessing an individual’s 
suitability for a security clearance, are unassailable. She has been candid about her 
foreign connections from the start of her background investigation. Furthermore, I had 
an opportunity to observe her demeanor while she testified. I found her forthcoming 
regarding her familial connections to Nigeria and wholly credible when she testified 
about her deep and longstanding connections to the United States. These favorable 
whole-person factors, in conjunction with the mitigating conditions noted above, mitigate 
the foreign preference and foreign influence concerns. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
