 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00089 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 4, 2013, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 15, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 29, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on May 20, 2013, by video teleconference. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 3, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing Paragraph 2.a. 
There was no objection and the motion was granted.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied ¶ 1.b with an explanation. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1983 and a master’s 
degree in 1992. He served on active duty in the Army from 1985 to 1992 and was 
honorably discharged as a sergeant (E-5). He has been married since 1982. He has a 
30-year-old daughter by a previous relationship. He and his wife had a daughter who 
passed away from cancer in 2007 at the age of 21. Applicant has held a top secret 
security clearance since 1987. Since his discharge from the Army, he has worked for 
the federal government and for federal contractors.2 
 
 When Applicant’s second daughter was approximately 19 years old, she was 
diagnosed with cancer. She was prescribed various medications to combat the disease. 
To alleviate the symptom of nausea associated with chemotherapy, she was given the 
drug Marinol intravenously. She was also prescribed it in pill form to be used at home. It 
was successful in helping her with her nausea.3  
 
 Applicant suffers from acid reflux and was prescribed the medication Protonix. It 
helped his ailment, but had a side effect of nausea. Applicant credibly testified that in 
July 2010 he ate spicy food and took Protonix. He was miserable and did not think he 
would be able to complete his shift at work. He did not want to call in sick. He went to 
his daughter’s medicine cabinet and saw a bottle of medicine with her name on it. The 
medicine label identified it as Marinol and said it was to treat nausea. There was one pill 
remaining. Applicant took the pill. He acknowledged that he was not prescribed the 
medication. He knew the medication was for nausea, and he thought it was better to 
                                                          
1 Tr. 12. 
 
2 Tr. 11, 45-46, 65-66. 
 
3 Tr. 45-50. 
 
 
3 
 
 
take it than to take an over the counter “random pill.”4 He testified that he now knows 
that his conduct was “dumb and stupid.”5  
 
After completing the night shift, the next morning Applicant was randomly 
selected by his employer to take a urinalysis. Throughout his adult life, Applicant has 
been subjected to random drug screenings, including when he was in the Army, working 
as a federal employee, and as a federal contractor. He estimated that he has taken at 
least 50 drug tests during his service and employment. He estimated he took two 
urinalysis tests at his present place of employment since he began working there. In the 
past, he has never tested positive for any banned substance. Applicant was later 
advised that his sample tested positive for Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). He denied 
knowingly using THC, which is the active ingredient in marijuana.6 
 
Applicant contacted the doctor who was responsible for handling his urine 
sample and told him that there was a mistake and the doctor must have mixed up his 
sample with someone else’s. He asked the doctor, his supervisor, and his human 
resource representative if he could take another drug test. He was told that he could 
have the same sample retested, but he could not submit a new sample. Applicant did 
not think that would be helpful, but continued to be adamant that he did not use THC.7 
 
Applicant researched to see if his acid reflux medicine had THC in it and 
determined it did not. Applicant struggled to figure out how his urine sample had THC in 
it. He looked at the medicine bottle that was prescribed to his daughter. He did an 
Internet search and learned Marinol has synthetic THC in it. He contacted the doctor 
from the lab, and the doctor told him that he could not help Applicant because the drug 
was not prescribed to him, but was for his daughter.8  
 
Applicant attempted to find out information from his daughter’s medical records to 
substantiate that she was prescribed Marinol, but could not gain access because his 
daughter never signed a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
form. He explained that he and his wife were reluctant to ask her to sign a HIPAA form 
because they did not want her to think that they thought she was dying or that they had 
lost hope for her recovery. Applicant does not have the prescription bottle that he took 
the pill from. His wife threw the bottle away along with other medication prescribed to 
their daughter. Applicant told his wife there was no reason to save the bottle because 
the medication was not prescribed to him.9 
                                                          
4 Answer to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. 42-44, 49-50, 55-57, 67-70; Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. 44, 52-57, 66, 73; GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. 56-62. 
 
8 Tr. 62-64. 
 
9 Tr. 50-52; 76-77. 
 
4 
 
 
Marinol, or the generic name dronabinol, is an FDA-approved drug that has 
synthetic cannabinoid or THC in it. It is prescribed for the treatment of nausea and 
vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy. It is excreted in both feces and urine. 
Following a single dose of the drug, low levels of dronabinol metabolites have been 
detected for more than five weeks in the urine or feces.10  
 
Applicant admitted he used his daughter’s prescription drug Marinol for his 
nausea. He denied he was aware that it contained THC. Applicant’s wife testified on his 
behalf and corroborated that Applicant told her that he thought the laboratory made a 
mistake with his urine sample. They were both shocked and confused by the positive 
test results. Neither knew at the time that Applicant’s use of his daughter’s prescription 
was wrong. Applicant never hid the fact that he took his daughter’s prescription drug.11  
 
Four character witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf and Applicant submitted 
two character letters. Each one attested to Applicant’s integrity and trustworthiness. 
Those working with him consider him one of their most dependable employees. He is 
trusted with the most sensitive material. He is ethical and hard working. He has an 
exceptional commitment to the mission and an outstanding work ethic. He is considered 
an honest and trustworthy employee.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
10 GE 4, 5.  
 
11 Tr. 66, 69-75. 
 
12 Tr. 21-37. 
 
5 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (a) Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; (b) Drug abuse is the illegal use of 
a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and concluded the 
following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
6 
 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant used his daughter’s prescription drug for nausea. He was not 
prescribed the drug. Unbeknownst to him, the prescription drug contained synthetic 
THC, and he tested positive. He held a security clearance at the time. I found 
Applicant’s testimony credible and believable. I find he did not knowingly use THC, but 
did knowingly use a drug not prescribed to him. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following 
two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s one-time use in 2010 of a drug not prescribed to him and for the sole 
purpose of alleviating nausea is a unique circumstance. Applicant has not repeated this 
conduct. He has a long history of random drug testing, all with negative results. His 
behavior happened almost three years ago and is unlikely to recur. His conduct does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant 
admitted he used his daughter’s prescription, but he had no idea that one of the 
components of the drug was THC. Although his misuse of the drug was wrong, his 
intent was not to abuse THC but to relieve his nausea. He now understands the 
seriousness of taking a drug not prescribed to him. Applicant does not intend to repeat 
his actions in the future. I find AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He made a mistake when he took his daughter’s 
prescribed medication for nausea. He was unaware that the medication had synthetic 
THC in it. Applicant did not knowingly use THC. It was not his intent to use THC. He 
made a one-time mistake using his daughter’s medication. Applicant has no history of 
drug abuse. He has a long history of negative drug test results. Applicant has an 
excellent employment record and is considered a trustworthy employee. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the drug involvement guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E    WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusions 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
