1 
            
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
      
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08319 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. She had 13 collection 
accounts,1 which totaled more than $34,000. She has been able to satisfy some of her 
delinquent obligations and is working to address the remainder. She has sufficiently 
rebutted or mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                          
1 In three of the collection accounts the same delinquent obligation is listed under two collection accounts. 
SOR 1.a and 1.f, SOR 1.e and 1.k, and SOR 1.j and 1.l, are the same delinquent debts attempting to be 
collected by two different collection agencies. The amount alleged owed after removing the duplications is 
approximately $26,000. 
2 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive,2 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) on November 22, 2013, detailing financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
 On December 14, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On June 17, 2015, the DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing to be convened 
on July 8, 2015. On June 30, 2015, for good cause shown, that hearing was cancelled. 
On September 18, 2015, a Notice of Hearing was issued for the hearing convened on 
October 8, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
A and B were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The record 
was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. Five documents, Ex. 
C through G, were admitted without objection. On October 16, 2015, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts with explanations. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. In 
February 2012, she obtained employment with the company sponsoring her application 
for a security clearance. (Ex. 2, Tr. 16) She served honorably in the U.S. Army from 
September 1978 through October 1979. (Ex. 1) She is legally separated from her 
husband, a retired U.S. Army master sergeant. (Tr. 19, 20, 47) Applicant receives 20% 
to 30% of her husband’s military retirement, which amounts to $640 per month. (Tr. 50)  
 
Applicant’s current annual salary is approximately $36,000. (Tr. 48) She has 
$6,000 in her savings account and 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 53, C-11, C-27) Her 
delinquent obligations are set forth in four credit reports: November 2011, September 
2013, February 2014, and April 2015. (Ex. 3, 4, 5, 6) In her November 2011 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), she lists five delinquent accounts 
totaling more than $14,000.  
  
 Between January 2009 and October 2011, Applicant was employed 8months and 
unemployed 27 months. (Ex. 2) Applicant has had four periods of unemployment: 
                                                          
2 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
3 
January 2009 through May 2009, October 2009 through June 2010, September 2010 
through May 2011, and from July 2011 through October 2011. (Ex. 1, 2) Between May 
2009 and October 2011, her total employment was ten months. (Ex. 1) During 2012, 
she received just over $15,000 in unemployment compensation. (Ex. 2)  
 
In two of her jobs, Applicant paid for a payment protection plan to assist her in 
the event of job loss. (Ex. C-22) However, when she did suffer job loss, the company 
contracted to assist her at the time of her loss of income, failed to honor the agreement 
and refused to pay her bills. (Ex. 1, Tr. 24) A class action lawsuit was commenced 
against the creditor listed in SOR 1.c and 1.d, for failing to honor their payment 
protection plan. (C-22, Ex. 2, Tr. 24) This may explain why the company chose to 
charge off both accounts. (Ex. 6)  
 
Due to the sporadic nature of her employment, Applicant is reluctant to enter into 
long-term repayment plans. Her preferred plan is to save up money and attempt to 
address a debt when she has saved sufficient funds. (Tr. 27)  
 
 Applicant suffers from lupus and moderate mitral valve prolapse. (Tr. 18) With 
her current job she has health insurance covering her medical expenses. (Tr. 19, Ex. C-
1, D-1) Her health insurance costs $1,000 for each three months of coverage. (Tr. 20) In 
March 2008, she and her 16-year-old daughter moved to be closer to her family and 
lived in her parent’s vacant home. (Ex. 1) She stayed in the home until her parents 
reoccupied the home. When she moved, her daughter was a high school senior. 
Applicant’s daughter joined the U.S. Air Force. Applicant’s son later joined her. Her son, 
now 30 years old, suffers from Asperger’s Syndrome, a form of autism. (Tr. 42) He 
joined the military and was recycled in basic training three times before being sent 
home. (Tr. 44) He is now attending nursing school. (Tr. 45) Applicant is paying his 
educational bills, which are $3,000 per semester. (Tr. 47, 58)  
 
 In 2012, Applicant was working as a contractor. (Tr. 16) Her position did not 
require a clearance, but did require her to have what she referred to as a “green” badge. 
(Tr. 16) Due to the Government shutdown, work at that location ended. She moved to 
her daughter’s home3 in another state in hopes of better employment possibilities. (Tr. 
16) She found a non-governmental job, which paid her $5,000 a month. However, after 
working a month she would be off for a month or two. This schedule made taking 
college classes impossible and also made obtaining repayment plans with creditors 
difficult. After a year with the company, she has been given a full-time schedule as of 
October 2015. (Tr. 17) Before being hired as a permanent employee, she worked “as 
needed” for the company, which also made financial planning more difficult. (Tr. 20)  
 
In October 2013, when Applicant answered financial interrogatories, she 
indicated she had turned her delinquent accounts over to her attorney who had settled 
five accounts. (Ex. 2) She hired him in May 2012. (Ex. C-14, C-28) She paid him $3,000 
                                                          
3 Applicant lives in a recreational vehicle (RV) parked in her daughter’s driveway. (Tr. 29) 
 
4 
to have him help her with her finances. (Ex. C-14, C-15, C-18, C-19, Tr. 24, 27, 51) She 
did not receive much assistance in return for her investment. (Tr. 27)  
 
 Applicant received an income tax refund after timely filing her 2011 federal 
income tax return, but her husband failed to file his return. She incurred a penalty when 
she withdrew funds from her 401(k) retirement plan. She makes $80 monthly payments 
to the IRS and paid more than $2,000 on her tax obligation. Following payments made 
in 2015, the IRS notified her in August 2015 that her 2011 federal income taxes had 
been paid in full. (Ex. C-10, C-25, C-26) There is no state income tax charged in her 
home state. 
 
 Applicant had a home improvement credit card with an $800 limit (SOR 1.a, 
$1,663). Late fees, over-limit fees, and interest doubled the amount owed. When she 
was laid off from work, as previously stated, a finance company failed to honor the 
payment protection plan. (Tr. 31) As of December 14, 2015, settlement in full had been 
made on this account. (Ex. C-22, C-23, C-24, Ex. G, Tr. 31) This debt is also listed 
under SOR 1.f, and it is a duplicated debt.  (Ex. 3, 5) 
 Applicant was notified she owed a cell phone bill (SOR 1.b, $1,315). She never 
opened the account, but another woman had used her Social Security number to 
fraudulently obtain service. (Tr. 26) She offered to settle the debt for $600, but when the 
collection firm checked with the telephone company, the telephone company 
acknowledged that Applicant had not opened the account. However, in the fall of 2015 
the same telephone account again appeared on her credit report. (Tr. 26) In December 
2015, she settled the debt, and the creditor agreed not to pursue further collection on 
the account. (Ex. F) 
 Applicant had two credit cards with the same company (SOR 1.c, $1,872 and 
SOR 1.d, $1,000) One card was for her daughter with a $300 limit and the other for her 
son with a $500 limit. (Tr. 33) She asserts she paid these debts with the assistance of 
her attorney. (Tr. 33) However, on her latest credit report both accounts are listed as 
written off, one in the amount of $1,400 and the other in the amount of $1,710. (Ex. 6)  
 In August 2007, Applicant opened a credit card for her daughter to obtain a pet 
(SOR 1.g, $1,830). (Tr. 34) The creditor offered to settle this debt for two payments of 
$990 each. She accepted the offer and made the required payments on May 31, 2012, 
and June 30, 2012. (Ex. 2, Ex. C-14, C-20, 21, Tr. 34)  
 At the hearing, Applicant asserted she never had an account with the creditor 
listed in SOR 1.e ($3,000). (Ex. 2, Tr. 33) Her November 2011 credit report indicates a 
zero balance on the account and states, “Resolved Reported by Grantor.” (Ex. 3) This 
debt is also listed under SOR 1.k as a duplicate debt.  (Ex. 6) Her April 2015 credit 
report also lists a zero balance owed on this account. However, $4,507 is listed as past 
due by the collection agency (SOR 1.k, $4,207) which is attempting to collect on a debt 
owed the creditor listed in SOR 1.e ($3,000). (Ex. 6)  
5 
 In June 2009, Applicant’s brother introduced her to an individual who, for a short 
period of time, moved in with Applicant and her daughter. (Tr. 23) The individual was an 
alcoholic and was financially dependent on her. (Ex. 2) The individual started pawning 
and selling Applicant’s goods. He also damaged her goods with a hammer. (Ex. 2) In 
August 2009, she moved to a new town to get away from the individual. (Ex. 1) Before 
obtaining a restraining order against the person, the individual stole her car and 
damaged the engine. (Ex. 2)  
 At some point, the individual moved into his own apartment. He asked Applicant 
to be at the apartment to meet the utility company employee so the electricity could be 
turned on. (Tr. 22) Unknown to the Applicant, the other individual had asked the electric 
company to add Applicant’s name to the account. (Tr. 23) Although she took no 
financial responsibility for the electric bill, the electric company wants her to pay the bill 
(SOE 1.h, $769). (Ex. A, Tr. 23) The creditor refused to dismiss the debt when Applicant 
was unwilling to aid in the prosecution of the other person. The April 2015 letter from the 
creditor states the creditor was looking to Applicant for payment of the utility bill (Ex. B) 
The creditor agreed to remove the credit bureau entry once the debt is paid. (Ex. B, Tr. 
63) Applicant has now paid the debt. (Ex. A, B, C 9, Tr. 25, 63) 
 Applicant had a health-care credit card (SOR 1.i, $7,105). (Tr. 33, 35) The 
account was used to pay for medical treatment for herself, her daughter, and her son. 
(Tr. 35) The original debt was $4,281 and the balance is now $7,105. (Ex. 5, 6) The 
account has not yet been addressed. It does not appear on her April 2015 credit report; 
however, it is listed on her November 2011, September 2013, and February 2014 credit 
reports as having been transferred to another creditor.  
 There were two collection accounts owed to the same collection firm (SOR 1.j, 
$5,183 and SOR 1.k, $4,207). Her credit report indicates the debt in SOR 1.l was 
purchased by another creditor and currently has a zero balance. (Ex. 6) The debt is now 
held by the creditor listed in SOR 1.j and has not been paid. She owed a collection 
agency $1,020 (SOR 1.m) for a cell phone and internet debt incurred in July 2009. (Ex. 
3) Applicant claims she had the service turned off when she moved and never received 
a final bill. She asserts she never received any calls or letters concerning this debt. The 
debt appears on her November 2011 credit reports, but not on her September 2013, 
February 2014, or April 2015 credit reports. (Ex. 3, 4, 5, 6) 
 In October 2015, Applicant’s daughter and her daughter’s five children moved in 
with Applicant when her daughter’s husband was arrested, jailed, and is now pending 
trial. (Ex. C) She has recently paid more than $3,500 to assist her daughter in paying 
legal fees and other expenses. (Ex. C-2 – C-5) Applicant’s vehicle is paid for. She is not 
receiving calls or letters from creditors demanding payments. (Tr. 28) She has paid non-
SOR debts (Ex. C-6, C-7, C-8) and numerous accounts in her credit reports are listed 
as satisfactorily paid. (Ex. 3, 4, 5, 6)  
 Applicant’s most recent credit report lists three unpaid collection accounts 
totaling $11,900: SOR 1.c, $1,872; SOR 1.j, $5,183; and SOR 1.k, $4,207. (Ex. 6) 
6 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her 
interview by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, her SOR 
response, her response to interrogatories, and her testimony. Applicant owed 
approximately $26,000 on ten collection accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
8 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Of the 13 SOR collection accounts, three are duplications of the same debts. 
Applicant paid an additional four debts. Her most recent credit report, April 2015, lists 
three delinquent SOR obligations totaling less than $12,000 that Applicant has yet to 
address. One debt (SOR 1.e, $3,000 and SOR 1.k, $4,207, which are the same debt) 
was incurred for moving expenses. The medical collection account (SOR 1.i) does not 
appear on her most recent credit report, and on the other three creditor reports, it is 
listed as transferred or sold. It does not appear on the credit reports under a different 
collection agency.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by periods 
of unemployment, the actions of an individual she lived with for a short period of time, 
and the failure of a company to honor its payment protection plan. Only three accounts 
remain as delinquent on her most recent credit report. The debts that were incurred for 
medical treatment, home repair, and moving to a new location in hope of better job 
prospects do not cast doubt on her judgment. The ten debts were incurred starting in 
2009. The number of debts was not large and less than $12,000 remains to be paid. 
The three remaining debts do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness or 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced medical problems, unemployment, 
financial difficulties caused by another, and by the financial company failing to honor its 
agreement to pay her debts when she became unemployed, which are factors beyond 
her control. When she was unable to pay her debts, she sought assistance from an 
attorney who helped her address some of her delinquent obligations. With her erratic 
work schedule, she has been unwilling to enter into long-term repayment plans. She 
has addressed the majority of her delinquent accounts and, under the circumstances, 
has acted reasonably. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), Applicant sought assistance from an attorney 
when she was unable to pay her debts. She has paid those debts that she was able to 
pay with her limited financial resources.  Her latest credit report lists only three debts of 
concern that she was unable to address and those three debts total less than $12,000. 
AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) apply. 
9 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. She incurred medical expenses for herself, her daughter, and son. She 
also incurred moving expenses in hopes to finding better job prospects. An additional 
debt was incurred in repairing her home. None of the debts appear extravagant. She 
was not living beyond her means. She lives in an RV parked in her daughter’s driveway. 
Her employment over the past few years has made it difficult to enter into long-term 
settlement agreements. She was working one month and then was off for a month. 
Since becoming a permanent employee, her work schedule has improved, and she has 
made progress paying her debts. She has established a track record of debt resolution.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid—it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
10 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.m:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
