 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05512 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s foreign family contacts create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and an unacceptable 
security risk. The mitigating information is insufficient to fully overcome the foreign 
influence security concerns. He mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 22, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. After 
reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. On April 22, 2015, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline B (foreign 
influence).1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 22, 2015, and requested a hearing 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 3, 2016, and 
reassigned to me on March 16 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 14, 
2016, scheduling a hearing for May 11, 2016. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered nine exhibits (Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9), and Applicant offered one 
exhibit (Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1) comprised of Tabs A through N. Tabs L through N 
were received post-hearing. All exhibits were admitted into the record without objection. 
GE 9 (Request for Administrative Notice of facts concerning Nigeria) was made part of 
the record but it is not evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on May 
25, 2016.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government requested that I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
the government of Nigeria based on documents published by the federal government. 
Applicant did not object, and I took administrative notice as requested.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.l, with 
explanations. He admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.j, and 2.a 
through 2.d, also with explanations. His SOR and hearing admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He and his four 
siblings were born in Nigeria to Nigerian parents. He was raised and educated in 
Nigeria. Applicant completed a bachelor’s degree and was working on his graduate 
program in Nigeria when he immigrated to the United States in October 2000 after 
winning a diversity visa sponsored by the U.S. State Department. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006. 
 
Applicant married in December 2002, and has a 10-year-old son, born in 2006. 
He separated from his wife in 2006, and as of the hearing date, their divorce was still 
pending. Applicant’s work history shows he was employed as a security guard with 
several defense contractors between 2001 and 2011. In 2011, he was fired because of 
timeliness issues, he missed a work day, and was insubordinate. He explained he had 
problems coming back from Nigeria after attending his father’s funeral, and that he was 
the subject of discrimination because he is an immigrant. He was unemployed for about 
seven months. Applicant was hired by his current employer, a defense contractor, in 
August 2011. 
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant testified that between 2001 and 2011, he worked two and sometimes 
three jobs to make money to get married, to pay for his son’s education, and to pay for 
his real estate properties. 
 
The SOR alleged several delinquent accounts related to Applicant’s real estate 
properties. He explained that when he married his wife, she owned a home and he 
moved in with her. Apparently, he was not contributing to pay his wife’s mortgage and 
he was asked to leave. In 2004, Applicant purchased a townhouse for $180,000 ($1,500 
mortgage payments) and his wife refused to move in with him. She bought a single 
family house, and he moved in with her and rented his townhouse. Applicant was asked 
to leave again, and he refinanced his townhouse, taking $25,000 out of the equity, and 
purchased a two-bedroom condominium in November 2005 for $200,000. His mortgage 
payment with condominium fees totaled $1,650 monthly. Additionally, he took a $20,000 
second mortgage on the condominium. 
 
Applicant’s renters failed to pay rent, and he had to take them to court 
repeatedly. He obtained judgments against them, and ultimately they abandoned the 
rental property. Applicant averred that even though he had three jobs, he could not 
afford to pay both properties’ mortgages, his debts, and living expenses. At the time the 
rental property was foreclosed in 2011, Applicant owed over $20,000 in mortgage 
payments. He claimed the mortgage debt was extinguished through the rental property 
foreclosure.  
 
Applicant tried to sell the townhouse and asked for a loan modification, but was 
unsuccessful and the rental property was foreclosed in 2011. His home (condominium) 
went through foreclosure proceedings also, and Applicant was evicted in 2011. He 
claimed that after two years living with his brother he was told the loan modification was 
approved and he moved back into his condominium. 
 
The status of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR follow: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – $8,126 judgment filed against Applicant in 2008. Applicant initially 
claimed that this judgment was extinguished through the foreclosure of the property. He 
presented no documentary evidence to show that the foreclosure extinguished the 
judgment. He then claimed that he satisfied the judgment in 2007, and that it was being 
illegally collected by the plaintiff. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that he made 
a $1,531 payment towards the judgment in 2007, and that a state court determined that 
Applicant had satisfied the judgment via a garnishment of wages on October 16, 2015. 
(AE 1, Tab L) Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that the alleged judgment was 
paid. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – $3,500 judgment filed against Applicant in 2010 resulting from a car 
accident. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows the judgment was vacated in 2011. 
(AE 1, Tab B) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – $1,359 judgment filed against Applicant in 2015. Applicant’s 
documentary evidence shows the judgment was satisfied in 2015. (AE 1, Tab C) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
SOR ¶ 1.d – $1,240 judgment filed against Applicant in 2006. Applicant’s 
documentary evidence shows the judgment was satisfied in 2015. (AE 1, Tab D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – $4,129 charged-off credit card account. Applicant explained he used 
the credit card to pay for his living expenses while unemployed. He has been making 
payments since 2013, albeit with some inconsistency. As of April 2016, he had reduced 
his debt to $1,050. (AE 1, Tab M) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – $618 returned check. Applicant claimed he mistakenly issued a 
check on a closed account in June 2014. When the bank notified him about the returned 
check, he issued another check from another checking account (for the original amount 
plus the returned check fee) and sent the check to the creditor in May 2015. (AE 1, Tab 
F) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – alleges a $25,073 charged-off second mortgage. Applicant 
purchased a condominium in 2006 and financed it with a first and second mortgages. In 
2011, he failed to pay the mortgages and was evicted pending foreclosure. Before the 
eviction, he had requested a loan modification that was approved in 2013. Applicant did 
not pay his second mortgage during the foreclosure-to-loan-modification period and 
accumulated the alleged debt.  
 
In May 2015, Applicant entered into a temporary monthly payment agreement 
with the creditor. The creditor was withdrawing the monthly payments out of Applicant’s 
bank account at the end of every month. (Tr. 59) Applicant testified that to pay his legal 
fees, he stopped paying the creditor in November 2015, and that he “just resumed 
paying again.” (Tr. 80-81) From May 2015 to May 2016, he reduced his debt by about 
$1,500. (AE 1, Tab G and N) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – $1,219 college tuition charges in collection. Applicant’s 
documentary evidence shows he paid the debt in October 2015. (AE 1, Tab H) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – $1,029 credit card debt in collection. Applicant explained that while 
he was unemployed in 2011, he used his credit card to pay his debts and living 
expenses. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he paid the debt in July 2015. (AE 
1, Tab I) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j – $2,071 college tuition charges in collection. Applicant’s documentary 
evidence shows that he started making payments in 2013, and the debt was paid in full 
in August 2015. (AE 1, Tab J) 
 
Applicant testified his current income is $100,000 a year, and he only works one 
job. In addition to his living expenses and existing debts, he owes legal expenses for his 
divorce and for his security clearance hearing. He depleted his savings, but has a small 
retirement account. Applicant believes that at the end of the month he does not have 
any money left over after paying his creditors. He anticipated that after paying more of 
his delinquent debts he will have sufficient money to live comfortably.  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s mother is a Nigerian citizen who has been living with Applicant in the 
United States since 2014. Her application for permanent residence was approved in 
March 2016. (AE 1, Tab K) 
 
Applicant has a brother and sister who are citizens and residents of Nigeria. He 
testified his brother is mentally handicapped and lives from the income of rental 
properties his father left when he passed away. His sister works for a bank, manages 
the rental properties, and takes care of their handicapped brother. She attempted to 
enter the United States in 2014, but was denied entry by immigration. Applicant testified 
that when his sister was getting married (2013-2014), he sent her $3,000 over a period 
of six months. (Tr. 75) Applicant has a history of providing financial support to family 
and friends in Nigeria. (GE 2) 
 
Applicant also has an uncle (his mother’s younger sibling) who is a resident and 
citizen of Nigeria. His mother supported his uncle and paid for his college education. He 
lent Applicant money to immigrate to the United States in 2000, and purchased a car for 
his mother. Applicant considers his uncle to be loyal and supportive of his mother. 
Applicant claimed he is not close to his uncle and that they communicate only two or 
three times a year. 
 
Applicant’s visited Nigeria in February 2011 to attend his father’s funeral. That 
was his only visit to Nigeria since he immigrated the United States in 2000. Applicant 
claimed he does not have any financial or property interests in Nigeria, and that he has 
no significant contact with any other relatives or friends in Nigeria. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant admitted that his father had two real estate properties that now belong to his 
succession. One of the properties is a five-apartment building – his brother lives in one 
and rents the other four apartments. The second property (four apartments) his father 
built for his relatives. Applicant claimed he has no idea of the value of these properties. 
Applicant has two younger brothers living in the United States. One of his brothers is a 
member of the U.S. Army Reserve and a pastor. The other brother works for a phone 
services company. 
 
Applicant does not intend to return to live in Nigeria. His priority is his son’s well-
being and education in the United States. Applicant, his mother, and his two brothers 
living in the United States are planning to bring his two siblings residing in Nigeria to the 
United States.  
 
  I take administrative notice of the following pertinent facts regarding Nigeria: 
Nigeria, a federal republic, gained its independence from Britain in 1960. Since gaining 
its independence, Nigeria has faced many challenges, including terrorist activity, 
sectarian conflicts (including ethnic, regional, and religious violence), entrenched 
corruption, and widespread mistrust of the government. Nigerian security forces, 
particularly the police, have been accused of serious human rights abuses. 
 
  Boko Haram, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization, is a violent 
Islamist movement in northern Nigeria with ties to Al Qaeda and other terrorist 
organizations. It has grown increasingly active and deadly in its attacks against state 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and civilian targets in recent years. In 2014, the group's abduction of almost 300 
schoolgirls drew international attention. The United States has established a strategic 
dialogue with Nigeria to address issues of mutual concern. 
 
  In general, the security situation in Nigeria remains fluid and unpredictable. The 
U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to avoid travel to a number of Nigerian 
states because of the risk of kidnapping, robberies, and other armed attacks. U.S. 
citizens, foreign nationals, and Nigerians experienced harassment and shakedowns at 
checkpoints and during encounters with Nigerian law enforcement. 
 
Policies 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, 
statements, SOR response, and hearing record. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence established that he resolved eight of the ten 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, albeit some were resolved after receipt of the 
SOR. He has been making payments to the creditors of SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g, and has 
reduced his debt by $3,000 and $1,500, respectively. 
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected to some extent by circumstances 
beyond his control, including his separation and pending divorce, and the passing of his 
father and the expenses associated with his trip back to Nigeria for his funeral. He was 
terminated from his job and was unemployed for a period for being late to work, 
reporting a day late to work from his trip to Nigeria, and for insubordination. Because his 
termination involved misconduct, I did not consider it a circumstance beyond his control. 
 
Additionally, Applicant became financially overextended by purchasing two real 
estate properties that he could not afford even after working two or three different jobs. 
He displayed a lack of financial responsibility in the acquisition of his properties and 
related debts. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant resolved eight of the ten accounts alleged in the SOR, 
and has been making good progress paying the remaining two debts. Based on 
Applicant’s actions addressing and paying his debts, his promise to timely pay his debts 
in the future, and his understanding that he has to demonstrate financial responsibility to 
be eligible for a clearance, I find that future delinquent debt is unlikely to recur. His past 
financial problems do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. I find there are clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved 
and is under control. His payments of some of his debts showed good faith. He has 
sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to continue making progress 
paying his remaining delinquent debts. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 7 in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant’s sister, brother and uncle are citizens and residents of Nigeria. The 
mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a 
matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a 
foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.3  
 
Applicant, directly or through his mother and siblings, has frequent contacts and 
a close relationship of affection and obligation with his relatives living in Nigeria. These 
contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is 
always the possibility that Nigerian agents or individuals operating in Nigeria may exploit 
the opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified information about the United States. 
Applicant’s relatives in Nigeria create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both 
directly or through his family members in Nigeria.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s mother has permanent residency in the United States, and she has 
been living with Applicant since 2014. Thus, the Guideline B security concerns raised by 
her are mitigated. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Nigeria by his Nigerian parents and 
relatives. He immigrated to the United States in 2000, at age 33. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006. 
 
Applicant has been working for government contractors from 2001 to present, 
except for a seven-month period in 2011 when he was unemployed. He was hired by 
his current employer in 2011.  
 
Applicant testified that all of his financial and property interests are in the United 
States, including a condominium he purchased in 2006, bank accounts, and his 
retirement account. Applicant denied having any financial or property interest in any 
other foreign country including Nigeria, except for his share on his father’s succession. 
He failed to provide the estimated value of his father’s succession properties in Nigeria.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family members living in 
Nigeria. Although there is no evidence that Nigerian government agents, or other 
entities, have approached or threatened Applicant or his family living in Nigeria, he is 
nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats, coercion, inducement, and manipulation 
made against him when he visits Nigeria, or through his family members living in 
Nigeria.  
 
Considering Nigeria’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
ongoing pervasive terrorist activity, sectarian conflicts (including ethnic, regional, and 
religious violence), and entrenched corruption, Applicant is not able to fully meet his 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives who 
are Nigerian citizens and residents] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.” AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) have limited applicability and do not mitigate the 
foreign influence concerns. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant has been living in the United States for about 16 years. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006, considers himself an American and the United States 
his home. This is where his career and professional opportunities are. He credibly 
testified that his foremost concern is the well-being and education of his son. Applicant 
has visited Nigeria once (to attend his father’s funeral) since immigrating to the United 
States in 2000. He believes that his contact with his relatives in Nigeria is infrequent 
because he does not visit them often and has infrequent communication with them. 
Notwithstanding, the risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress are significant because 
Nigeria has an extensive history of terrorist activity, sectarian conflicts (including ethnic, 
regional, and religious violence), and entrenched government corruption.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered that Applicant has lived in Nigeria most of his life and in the 
United States during the last 16 years. He has worked for government contractors since 
2001. Applicant considers the United States his home and he considers himself an 
American.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s foreign family contacts and financial and property 
interests in Nigeria create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, and an unacceptable security risk. The mitigating 
information taken together is insufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security 
concerns.  
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. However, he has not carried his burden of 
persuasion concerning the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:      For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  Subparagraph 2.a:       For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.b - 2.d:      Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
