 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-10304 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 15, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 12, 
2016. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on May 10, 2016, and 
transferred to me on July 27, 2016.  On August 2, 2016, a Notice of Hearing was 
issued, scheduling the hearing for August 26, 2016. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 6 without objection.  Applicant testified, 
called one witness, and offered five exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A – E without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 6, 2016. 
The record was held open until September 9, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit 
 
2 
 
 
additional documents. Applicant timely submitted a document which is admitted as AE 
F. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits all SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since October 
2012. He left high school in order to earn money to support his family. He is in the 
process of studying for his General Equivalency Degree. He married in September 
2013. He and his wife have three children, two daughters, ages 6 and five months, and 
a son, age 2. Applicant also has two adult sons, ages 21 and 23, from a previous 
relationship. (Gov 1; Tr. at 21, 26-27, 39, 53)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he owed 
child support arrearages for his two older sons. The SOR alleged the balance of his 
past due child support amount was $44,000. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 1 at 38-39; Gov 5 at 4) 4 
at 4) The SOR also alleged a $606 account that was placed for collection in 2008 (SOR 
¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 3 at 4) A credit report dated May 30, 2012, listed four additional 
delinquent accounts. (Gov 3 at 4-5) However, they no longer appear on Applicant’s 
recent credit reports and are not alleged in the SOR because they are resolved. (Gov 2; 
Gov 6) 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits both debts. Applicant testified that he 
stopped paying his child support for his two oldest sons after he caught their mother  
with another man. The mother of his children sought child support through State A even 
though he had paid her $500 per week before the court order was entered. He began 
his child support payments in arrears because he could not prove that he paid the 
previous payments. A few years later, Applicant’s mother passed away. Applicant was 
depressed and began drinking heavily for a number of years. He did not pay child 
support during the period he was drinking heavily. (Tr. 28 – 33; Gov 5). 
 
In 2002, Applicant moved to State B, in part, to look for employment, and, in part, 
to get away from alcohol. He continued to abuse alcohol after moving to State B. He 
was arrested for DUI in July 2004 and then arrested for DUI in July 2008. After the 2008 
DUI arrest, Applicant was ordered to attend alcohol counseling classes. He connected 
with one of his counselors, found help, and continued with the counseling sessions after 
he finished the court requirements. He has not consumed alcohol in over eight years. 
He attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) until August 2009, when he and his fiancé, 
now wife, moved to the State C where he currently resides. Applicant no longer attends 
AA,  but has found religion and relies on his faith to remain sober. (Tr. 33 -36) 
 
Once Applicant became sober, he began to work on paying off his delinquent 
debts.  After moving to State C, Applicant had several jobs before being hired by his 
 
3 
 
 
current employer. He worked as an apprentice for one year. He was laid off as a result 
of downsizing. He worked for another company for one year in 2010. Applicant always  
made sure that child support was deducted from his paychecks when he was working. 
His income tax return refunds are also applied to his child support arrearages. (Tr. 38-
39, 56-57, 68) In his current position, payments towards his child support arrearages 
are taken out of his paycheck through an automatic deduction. (AE C; AE E) The 
current balance of his child support arrearage is $32,415. (AE A; AE F at 6) 
 
Applicant  believes the $606 collection account was for a self-help compact disc 
that he purchased in 2008. (Tr. 43-45) After the hearing, he entered into an agreement 
with the creditor.  He agreed to pay $300 on September 16, 2016; $100 on October 21, 
2016, and $100 on November 18, 2016, in full settlement of the debt. Applicant provided 
proof that he paid the first installment of $300 on September 16, 2016. (AE F at 7-10)  
 
Applicant’s wife testified during the hearing. She and Applicant met in 2008 and 
married in September 2013. She testified that her husband does not have good 
recognition of dates and times. She is responsible for the household budget. She 
testified that they had bad credit but steadily worked to improve their credit. They have 
kept in touch with creditors making arrangements so that they could pay as soon as 
they were able to afford to make payments. They were able to purchase a car and a 
home. They have three beautiful children together. Applicant has a steady job and 
earns overtime when the company allows it. Applicant’s wife is a full-time student 
studying for her Master’s. She will graduate next summer, and then they will have two 
incomes. They hope to pay more towards Applicant’s child support arrearages once she 
finds a job. Although he made errors in the past, Applicant’s wife says he has done 
everything he can to move forward. (Tr. 54 – 63) 
 
Applicant’s family budget consists of a combined monthly income of $4,250 and 
$3,218 in monthly expenses. (AE F at 3-4) Applicant also has $16,712.71 in a 401(k). 
(AE D) 
 
Applicant and his wife have faced several financial challenges over the past few 
years.  Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with pre-eclampsia with her youngest child and 
had an emergency caesarian section.  The baby was in the neo natal infant intensive 
care unit (NICU) for two weeks. Applicant’s wife stayed with the baby, who was in a 
hospital located in a neighboring state. Applicant had to take four weeks of unpaid leave 
to care for the other two children. This was a financial setback for them. In addition, their 
oldest daughter had eye surgery at age two. She was also recently diagnosed with 
autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. (Tr. 49, 59, 65-71)  
 
Applicant’s most recent credit report lists one debt that is past due $181. It is a 
sporting goods store credit card. They are current on federal and state income taxes.  
(Tr. 51-52; Gov 6 at 2)  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
Applicant’s supervisor states that Applicant has been a diligent worker and a 
trustworthy member of his crew. Applicant takes ownership of issues and works on 
difficult problems through completion. He ensures the quality of his work in order to 
meet the company’s quality standards. Applicant is always willing to work extra hours to 
help out the team and complete important jobs. (AE B) Applicant has never been 
disciplined or suspended from work. He has never had any safety infractions. (Tr. 22)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations), apply.  Applicant neglected paying his 
child support obligations for a number of years which resulted in a balance of $44,000 in 
arrearages. He also failed to pay a $606 delinquent account that was placed for 
collection.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
 
6 
 
 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions apply:  
 
 AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant 
failed to pay his child support obligations during a lengthy period when he was 
depressed and drinking alcohol to excess.  He has been sober since 2008. Upon 
becoming sober, he has attempted to resolve his delinquent accounts. When he was 
employed full-time, he arranged for the child support to be deducted out of his 
paychecks. Child support deductions are currently being taken out of his paychecks with 
his present employer.  He has reduced the child support arrearage from $44,000 to 
$32,415. While there is no excuse for Applicant’s lapse of paying child support, he is 
making amends and making payments now. He also is in the process of resolving the 
$605 account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  He has taken steps to resolve his financial issues 
while supporting a wife and three young children. Applicant’s past financial issues do 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply to the years where Applicant 
neglected to pay child support because he was drinking heavily. However, credit is 
given to Applicant after he became sober in 2008. For a number of years he changed 
jobs, but always insured that his child support arrearage was deducted from his 
paycheck.  He and his wife have systemically resolved their delinquent accounts, most 
of which were not alleged in the SOR. Applicant and his wife recently experienced one 
major setback with his wife’s complicated pregnancy and their youngest daughter’s stay 
in the NICU for several weeks after her birth. However, Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. He still made his child support arrearage payments, and his 
recent credit report indicates only one credit card account that is behind by $181. He 
and his wife live within their means and acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies because Applicant’s financial situation is now under control. He is making his 
child support arrearage payments, he entered into a repayment agreement with the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  Applicant has demonstrated that his financial problems are being 
resolved.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant has reduced his child support arrearages 
from $44,000 to $32,415. He entered into a payment arrangement to resolve the $605 
 
7 
 
 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  He has made the first of three payments. While he could 
have resolved this debt earlier, credit is given because he resolved several delinquent 
debts before the SOR was issued, resulting in the debts not being alleged in the SOR. 
After attaining his sobriety, Applicant has worked to make amends and has done an 
excellent job. He is making a good-faith effort to resolve his debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the favorable reference of 
Applicant’s supervisor and his four years of favorable duty performance with his 
employer. Applicant struggled with alcohol issues for many years. This resulted in his 
neglecting his child support obligations for his two older sons, and several DUIs.  After 
his last DUI in 2008, Applicant met a good counselor who taught him successful tools to 
maintain his sobriety.  He met his wife and they have made a good team in resolving 
their delinquent debts. They started their own family and have been able to purchase a 
car and a home. He is doing what he can to provide for his younger children and pay his 
child support arrearages. Although Applicant and his wife have struggled to pay the bills 
on occasion, they always have been able to eventually resolve their delinquent 
accounts.  Security concerns under financial considerations are mitigated.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
