 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-12160 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on July 10, 2015, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on February 18, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 4, 2016, setting the 
hearing for March 31, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. I 
 
2 
 
marked Department Counsel’s exhibit list as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, 
but did not offer exhibits at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to 
submit additional evidence. He submitted Applicant exhibits AE A through F, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 12, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all the SOR allegations, except for ¶ 1.c, which he admitted. 
The admission is incorporated as a finding of fact. After a review of the pleadings, 
transcript, and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and has worked for his current government contractor-
employer since 2008. He has a high school diploma and has taken some college 
courses. He is married and has two children and a step-child. He retired from the Army 
in 2002 as a staff sergeant (pay grade E-6) after 21 years of honorable service. He also 
deployed at various times since 2002 to both Iraq and Afghanistan as a contractor. He 
held a security clearance while in the Army and as a contractor beginning in 2002.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant incurred 10 delinquent debts totaling over $55,000. 
His debts were listed on credit reports from March 2012, August 2012, and December 
2014, and referenced during his personal subject interview (PSI) from August 2012.2  
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulties starting in about 2007. From August to 
September 2007 he was unemployed. His step-daughter required extensive medical 
care during this same time. When he gained employment, it was for a position where he 
was separated from his family thereby incurring the additional expenses of paying for 
two households. Applicant’s wife handled the family’s finances when Applicant began to 
deploy overseas. She tried to work with the creditors to set up payment plans, but they 
refused. She did not present documentation to show such contacts. She hired a debt 
relief service (DRS) to assist in disputing debts and in general to clean up their credit. 
She paid a monthly fee to this service and it successfully had some of the debt entries 
removed from the credit reports. She was advised by the DRS to stop paying on the 
debts because they were quite old and would soon be removed from their credit reports. 
She followed that advice. Some debts were removed from their credit reports, and they 
have not been contacted by those creditors in the past eight years. None of the SOR 
debts have been paid. In 2015, Applicant purchased a home and is current on the 
payments. Applicant’s most recent credit report shows that all debts are current and no 
past-due or collection accounts appear on the report. His yearly income is about 
$145,000, including his military retirement pay. The status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 20-21; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 41-43, 46-47, 51, 58, 59; Answer; AE B, E-F. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a (credit card--$7,011): 
 
 This charged-off account no longer appears on Applicant’s most recent credit 
report. The debt has not been paid.4  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f (medical debts--$1,126; $113; $965): 
 
 These charged-off accounts no longer appear on Applicant’s most recent credit 
report. These debts have not been paid.5 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.e, 1.g – 1.j (consumer accounts--$7,698; $16,988; 1,118; 
$1,439; $1,752; $16,868): 
 
 These charged-off accounts no longer appear on Applicant’s most recent credit 
report. These debts have not been paid.6 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 29; AE A.  
 
5 Tr. at 30; AE A.  
 
6 Tr. at 32; AE A.  
 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had 10 debts that he failed to pay over an extended period of time. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts remain unpaid even though they do not appear on his recent 
credit report. He did not provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant presented some evidence 
that the debts were due to circumstances beyond his control (unemployment for a few 
months in 2007, medical expenses for his daughter, supporting two households), but he 
failed to provide documentation showing that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Taking the advice of the DRS, to let the debts fall off the credit report 
due to the passage of time, is not responsible action in the security context. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies. He did not provide documentation showing that the debts had 
been paid or that he established payment plans, on the contrary, he admitted that none 
of the debts were paid. There is no evidence of financial counseling, other than the 
hiring of the DRS. Allowing aged delinquent debts to fall off credit reports because of 
the passage of time, does not equate to a good-faith effort to pay. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply. He did not produce documentary evidence to support a dispute of 
any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, civilian contractor deployments, and the 
personal circumstances that contributed to his financial problems. However, I also 
considered that Applicant failed to pay these debts, rather he chose to let them be 
removed from his credit report through the passage of time. While that approach may 
make financial sense, from a security perspective it does not, because his actions are 
not reliable or trustworthy.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns 
under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
