 Exhibit 4 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-05759
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for
access to classified information. He did not present sufficient documentary evidence to
mitigate the concern stemming from his history of treatment for excessive consumption
of alcohol. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on February 14, 2014.  One year later on February 17, 2015,1
after reviewing the application and information gathered during a background
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a statement of reasons2
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
2
(SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to3
a complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline G for alcohol consumption. Applicant answered the SOR with a one-page
memorandum on March 17, 2015.     
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so the case
will be decided on the written record.  On August 4, 2015, Department Counsel4
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  The5
file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on January 12, 2016, who
received it on February 16, 2016. He did not reply within the 30-day period from receipt
of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2016.    
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job
as a technical writer and editor for a company working in the defense industry. He has
been so employed since 2014. He worked in a similar capacity for another defense
contractor during 2011–2012. He has worked as a writer and editor since at least 1996.
His employment history includes honorable service in the U.S. Army during 1979–1984.
His earned an associate’s degree in 1987 and a bachelor’s degree in 1989. He married
in 1984, and he has two adult children. He and his spouse have lived at the same
residence, which they own, since 1991. 
Under Guideline G, the SOR alleges three items concerning Applicant’s history of
treatment for excessive consumption of alcohol: (1) he attended an alcohol counseling
program at treatment center one (TC1) from December 2013 to April 2014, and was
treated for depression, pain management, and alcoholism, and his prognosis regarding
alcohol use was poor; (2) he attended alcohol counseling at TC2 from February 2007 to
November 2007, and from January 2009 to August 2013, during which time he was
diagnosed with alcohol dependence, generalized anxiety, and major depressive
disorder; and (3) he continues to consume alcohol notwithstanding the diagnosis of
alcohol dependence. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations
and provided an explanation as summarized below.
 Exhibit 4 at 37, 40–43. 6
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
3
Applicant explained that he has taken steps to overcome his past problems with
alcohol. He stated that he entered a three-day detoxification program in 2007, after his
use of alcohol became excessive. He completed the program and continued to see
counselors and attend meetings until he felt he had no more to gain from participation.
He stated that he now takes an antidepressant drug daily and meets with a counselor
several times a year to track his progress. He was not familiar with the diagnoses
mentioned in the SOR allegations, and believes them to be disproportionate and
reflective of differences of opinion concerning people who return to social drinking after
therapy. He stressed that his ongoing monitoring of his use of alcohol is voluntary on his
part, and he believes doing so reflects good judgment. He noted that he has never had
an arrest for drunk driving or for alcohol-related incident; he’s been married for more
than 30 years; and he’s lived in the same home for a quarter of a century, all of which
shows he lives a stable life. 
Other than Applicant’s admissions to the SOR, the evidence is limited to the
information he self-reported in his February 2014 security clearance application.6
Neither Department Counsel nor Applicant submitted any other documentary
information in support of their case. The information he self-reported about his history of
treatment for excessive use of alcohol largely supports the SOR allegations. There is no
evidence concerning who (e.g., a physician, clinical psychologist, or licensed clinical
social worker) made the diagnosis of alcohol dependence as well as no evidence of
what was the factual basis for the diagnosis. Likewise, there is no evidence of
Applicant’s involvement in an alcohol-related incident at work or away from work; there
is no evidence that he has a police record of any kind; and there is no evidence of
financial problems related to excessive use of alcohol. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 AG ¶¶ 21, 22, and 23 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 18
4
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it17
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline G for alcohol consumption,  the suitability of an applicant may18
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive use of
alcohol, because such use often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).19
5
failure to control impulses, which can raise questions about a person’s reliability and
trustworthiness. 
In analyzing the written record, I have considered the disqualifying conditions set
forth in AG ¶¶ 22(c), (d), (e), and (f). Likewise, I have considered the mitigating
conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 23(b) and (d). Having done so, I conclude the evidence
supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic history of excessive use of
alcohol sufficient to raise a concern about his fitness or suitability for access to
classified information. I further conclude that Applicant has not met his burden to
present persuasive evidence of reform and rehabilitation to mitigate the concern. Other
than the one-page memorandum in answer to the SOR, he presented no documentation
in support of his case. What is missing here is important information showing that
Applicant’s past excessive use of alcohol is not a current problem. For example, he
could have presented a recent evaluation, opinion, and favorable prognosis by a
qualified professional. Given the state of the written record, I am unable to reach a
favorable decision for Applicant.  
The concern over Applicant’s problematic history of excessive use of alcohol
creates doubt about his current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to
protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or
vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I19
conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
