 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06931 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
In a response dated September 7, 2015, Applicant admitted six of the eight allegations 
raised and requested a determination based on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
On December 21, 2015, the Government prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) 
which included eight attachments (“Items”). Applicant timely responded to the FORM in 
a package dated January 9, 2016, containing four positive recommendations and 
multiple certificates. I was assigned the case on March 3, 2016. Based on a thorough 
review of the case file, I find that Applicant’s materials failed to mitigate foreign influence 
security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old male who was born and raised in Afghanistan. He 
began working as a linguist with various defense contractors in 2002. He has earned a 
certificate from an English language program, received formal training as a linguist, 
completed coursework in purchasing and systems acquisitions, and worked at a 
linguistic training center for about five years.  
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant has several positive letters of reference, dated between 2006 and 
about October 2015, just prior to his January 2016 FORM response. All praise Applicant 
in high terms regarding his professionalism, dedication, positive attitude, linguistic 
abilities, and service. (FORM Response; SOR Response, Item 6) His current 
professional point of contact wrote that Applicant is a “great asset” to his team. (FORM 
Response, Recommendation of Oct. 10, 2015) Applicant has received multiple 
certificates of appreciation for his work on behalf of the United States military abroad, 
from 2006 to his tenure as a translator and cultural advisor from 2013 through 2014. 
(FORM Response, certificates)  
 
In the autumn of 2007, Applicant was granted a special immigrant visa devised 
for linguists serving with the U.S. Armed Forces. He arrived in this country between late 
2007 and early 2008, and received a green card shortly thereafter. In 2008, he married 
a woman from Afghanistan. The couple is now settled in the United States. They have 
had three children, at least one of whom was born in the United States.  
 
Applicant moved back and forth between the United States and various defense-
related assignments abroad for several years.1 He applied for U.S. citizenship in late 
2012 and became a naturalized United States citizen in 2013. Today, Applicant’s wife 
cares for their children while he attends to his translating duties. 
  
At issue in the SOR is Applicant’s relationship with multiple family members and 
friends who are citizens and residents in Afghanistan, including his mother, three 
sisters, two college-age brothers, and various extended family members. In addition, his 
in-laws are also citizens of Afghanistan. Their current residence, however, is 
unaddressed. (FORM, Item 2 at 36-39)  
 
Although Applicant’s wife is now a full-time resident of the United States in 
possession of a green card, she remains a citizen of Afghanistan. Their children are all 
citizens of the United States. Applicant maintains telephonic contact with his mother and 
siblings on a weekly basis, discussing their health and family-related topics. In addition, 
Applicant maintains contact with extended relations in Afghanistan. He does not discuss 
his work with any of these contacts. There is no evidence indicating whether any of 
these individuals or their loved ones has or has had any association with Afghanistan’s 
government or military.  
 
Applicant wires monetary support to his widowed mother, a housewife. He noted 
that he supports his “mother twice a year for about 3 thousand dollars.” (SOR 
Response, narrative, at 1) About once a year, he wires each of his five siblings about 
$1,000. In addition, Applicant is co-owner, along with his two uncles, of a property in 
Afghanistan in which his mother and brothers live.2 The property is valued at 
                                                          
1 FORM, Item 7, Personal Subject Interview (PSI) summary (March 2012), at 2-4. 
 
2 In 2016, Applicant stated that his “immediate family members are living in [his] share of the house.” 
(SOR Response, narrative, at 1). The overall record is unclear as to whether his sisters live at that 
 
 
 
 
3 
approximately $100,000. It is a “family compound” in which he inherited his interest at 
birth, and in which about 20 people resided as of 2012.3 In sum, between 2008 and 
2015, Applicant sent $28,000 to his family members in Afghanistan.4 
 
In accordance with Department Counsel’s request (FORM, Item 8), I have taken 
administrative notice that Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919, and 
it was a monarchy until a military coup in 1973. Following a second military coup in 
1978, a Marxist government emerged. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded 
and occupied Afghanistan, but they were resisted by the Afghan mujahedeen. The 
Soviet Union withdrew in February 1989 pursuant to an agreement signed by Pakistan, 
Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union. The mujahedeen were not a party 
to the agreement and refused to abide by it. The result was a civil war among several 
factions, including the Taliban. By the end of 1998, the Taliban controlled most of 
Afghanistan, committed atrocities against minority populations, and provided sanctuary 
to terrorist organizations.  
 
U.S. military forces, along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced the 
Taliban out of power by November 2001. With the assistance and support of the United 
States, a new democratic government took office in 2004. The effectiveness of the 
central government of Afghanistan has increased, but local governments are weak and 
corruption is widespread.  
 
I also have noted that Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor, due to 
the continuing insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two 
decades of war. In spite of efforts by the U.S. and the government of Afghanistan, it 
continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country. The border area between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan remains a safe haven for insurgents and criminal groups. The 
weak government and internal instability have enabled hostile states, non-state actors, 
terrorists, and insurgents to continue operating in Afghanistan, including groups hostile 
to the United States. Insurgents use narcotics trafficking and kidnapping to finance their 
military and technical capabilities. Suicide bombing attacks continue to inflict large 
numbers of casualties. Insurgent groups encourage Afghan security personnel to 
conduct insider attacks to undermine the trust between the U.S. forces and contractors 
and their Afghan partners. 
 
     Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” (Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988)) As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
residence or if any are now married. Applicant’s two uncles are private sector shopkeepers. Little is 
provided regarding their own families. 
 
3 FORM, Item 7, PSI summary (March 2012), at 1-2. 
 
4 This sum includes funds sent to Applicant’s wife before she came to the United States. It is noted that 
the sum of $28,000 is considerably less than cumulative sums he stated he has sent to his mother and 
five siblings during the time period at issue. This discrepancy is not reconciled in the case file contents. 
 
 
 
 
4 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” (Id. at 527) The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended)  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. The Government reposes a high 
degree of trust and confidence in persons with access to classified information. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” (See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7) Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. Initially, the Government must establish, by 
substantial evidence, conditions in the personal or professional history of the applicant 
that may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information.  
 
The Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. (See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531) The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. (See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993)) Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. 
(See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)) An applicant has the 
ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue his security clearance. (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2002)) Security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials. (Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b))  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
     Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence:  
 
Under AG ¶ 6, foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this guideline should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States 
citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
Here, although the democratic government of Afghanistan is working with the United 
States in its military efforts, internal upheavals are existent and the threat of terrorism is 
prevalent within its borders. 
 
The SOR correctly alleges that Applicant’s mother, siblings, and some extended 
family members and associates are citizens and residents of Afghanistan (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-
1.d, 1.f). He maintains weekly telephonic contact with his mother and siblings.  
Moreover, although Applicant’s wife now resides in the United States, she remains a 
citizen of Afghanistan with family yet remaining in Afghanistan.5 (SOR ¶ 1a) In addition, 
Applicant is co-owner of the residential property in Afghanistan, valued at approximately 
$100,000, in which he provides a residence for his family members in that country; 
these same family members were the recipients of at least $28,000 between 2008 and 
2015. (SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.h) 
 
Four disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: AG ¶ 7(a): contact 
with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other 
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or 
country by providing that information; AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and AG ¶ 7(e): a substantial 
business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or 
foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
Family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country do not per se disqualify an 
applicant from obtaining access to sensitive information; such ties are only disqualifying 
if they create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or a potential conflict of interest. 
The country in question also must be considered. The United States has worked in 
concert with Afghanistan in recent years in the battle against terrorism. As previously 
                                                          
5 The evidence, however, shows Applicant’s children are United States citizens living in this country. 
 
 
 
 
6 
noted, however, Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor due to the 
continuing insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two 
decades of war. In spite of efforts by the U.S. and the government of Afghanistan, it 
continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk,” which 
denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government. When family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. 
(ISCR Case No. 01- 22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003)) Moreover, in considering the 
nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue. (See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not 
consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided)) The ineffectiveness of 
the Afghan government, continuing threats from insurgent and extremist groups, and 
the government’s poor human rights record are sufficient to establish the heightened 
risk required by AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) and the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
Taken in tandem with Applicant’s close ties to his family abroad, as well as his foreign 
real estate investment maintained on their behalf, all four disqualifying conditions noted 
are thus established.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S; AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with 
foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established under these facts, given the considerations noted 
above in reference to AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). AG ¶ 8(c) may be substantially 
established for Applicant’s extended family members and former contacts in 
Afghanistan. It is not, however, established for his mother and siblings for whom he 
provides financial support and housing. Under these facts, it cannot be found that he 
has rebutted the presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual. (ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002)) 
With regard to Applicant’s children, AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Although Applicant’s wife 
is now a resident of the United States, her relationship to her own family members 
abroad remains unaddressed.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole 
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my 
whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is mature, well-educated, and has experience in his field that is both 
considerable and highly valued. He has worked for defense contractors for many years, 
and he has served reliably, diligently, and faithfully under dangerous conditions. He 
qualified for a special visa due in large part to his service to the United States. 
Generally, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security procedures and 
regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative value for the purposes of 
refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security concerns raised by that applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying circumstances. However, where an applicant has established 
by credible, independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures 
and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which 
the applicant made a significant contribution to the national security, such 
circumstances give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he or she will recognize, 
resist, and report a foreign power or terrorist’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. In 
this case, Applicant has a track record of complying with security regulations and 
procedures in high-risk circumstances in which he made significant contributions to 
national security. (See ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 19, 2008); ISCR 
Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008)) Given these facts, it cannot be stressed 
enough that Applicant’s loyalty is not at issue. 
 
In requesting an administrative decision based on the written record, however, 
questions regarding Applicant’s family members remain unanswered and some security 
concerns remain. Applicant is clearly close to his family in Afghanistan, with whom he 
maintains weekly contact, provides them with a home, and annually wires them money. 
Information about his siblings, especially his sisters and uncles, is incomplete. 
Moreover, information about his wife is scant. Given his work and their vulnerabilities in 
present-day Afghanistan, there is insufficient information to conclude that Applicant’s 
materials mitigate foreign influence security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 FOREIGN INFLUENCE     AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
Allegation  1.a:     For Applicant 
Allegations 1.b-1.d:     Against Applicant 
Allegation  1.e:     For Applicant 
Allegations 1.f-1.h:     Against Applicant 
            
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Security clearance is denied.  
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
