 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 14-06677 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Meg Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen J. Stair, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence), Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen from India. She has mitigated the foreign 
influence concerns raised by her relationships with relatives who are citizens of India. 
Applicant incurred delinquent debts, however her finances are now under control. Her 
failure to disclose these debts as required was unintentional. She has mitigated the 
Guidelines B, F, and E concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on February 28, 2014. On June 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent 
her a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines B, 
E, and F. The DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
 
2 
 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2015, and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on December 28, 2015, and Counsel for 
Applicant entered his appearance on February 4, 2016. The hearing was scheduled for 
June 1, 2016, with another administrative judge. The case was transferred to me on 
May 31, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. I kept the 
record open until June 17, 2016, to enable her to submit additional documentary 
evidence. She timely submitted AX K through AA which I have admitted without 
objection.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 9, 2016. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about India.1 Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. The relevant 
facts are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below. The SOR alleges under 
Guideline B that Applicant’s parents, brother and sister are citizens and residents of 
India. Applicant admits these allegations. The SOR alleges under Guideline F that 
Applicant has seven delinquent debts totaling $23,414. Applicant admits these 
allegations, and gives a status of each account. She states that she paid the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. The SOR also alleges under Guideline E that 
Applicant intentionally falsified her e-QIP when she failed to disclose her delinquent 
accounts as required. Applicant denies these two allegations. Applicant’s admissions in 
her Answer are incorporated in my findings of fact.     
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old monitor technician who has worked for her primary 
employer since 2013. She has also worked as a monitor technician for another 
employer since 2007. (GX 1.) She is being sponsored for a position of trust by a federal 
contractor. (Tr. 54.) She received her bachelor’s degree in 1992 and her master’s 
degree in 1997, both from universities in India. (GX 1.) Prior to leaving India, Applicant 
worked as a teacher. (Tr. 57.)  
 
 India is a parliamentary democracy that shares significant strategic interests with 
the United States. In addition to cooperating on counter-terrorism issues, the two 
countries have increased trade in goods and services, and engage in mutual efforts to 
ensure energy security, combat global climate change, and promote job growth. 
Although largely positive, the relationship between the United States and India is not 
                                                            
1 The administrative notice request is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
 
3 
 
without its concerns. India is an avid collector of U.S. proprietary information, and there 
have been several criminal cases of industrial espionage arising out of India, both from 
private sources and from the government itself. Terrorist activity occurs in many areas 
of India, and the country is one of those most persistently targeted by foreign and 
domestic terrorist groups. India has some significant problems with human rights. India 
has good diplomatic relations with Iran and supports that country’s efforts to develop 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. India’s largest supplier of military systems and 
spare parts is Russia. Despite this, President Obama has called the United States’ 
relationship with India one of the defining partnerships of the 21st century. (HE I.) 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, and brother are residents and citizens of India. They 
reside in a rural area near the border of Pakistan, which experienced a terrorist attack in 
2015, but is generally not an area subjected to terrorist activities. (Tr. 23; HE I.) Her 
father retired from the Indian army in 1996 and currently works as a farmer. He receives 
a pension, but has no obligations to or affiliations with the army. Her mother has not 
worked outside the home. (Tr. 23-25.) Applicant’s parents last visited her in the United 
States in 2012 for two months. (Tr. 35.) Her parents intended to remain in the United 
States and had received green cards, however, Applicant’s brother-in-law died in an 
accident so they returned to India, and their green cards have since expired. (GX 2.) 
Applicant’s sister does not work outside the home. Applicant has weekly telephonic 
contact with her. (GX 1.) Applicant’s brother received a bachelor’s degree and several 
years of computer training, but now also works as a farmer. (Tr. 25.) Applicant is 
sponsoring her brother and his family to immigrate to the United States, but she is 
uncertain when this might occur. (Tr. 88-89.) Her sister’s immigration paperwork has 
also been approved, however, her in-laws will not permit her to move to the United 
States. (Tr. 88.)   
 
Applicant was married in an arranged marriage in India in 2002. (Tr. 27.) 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2005 to join her husband, and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2010. Because India does not recognize dual citizenship, 
Applicant effectively renounced her Indian citizenship when she became a U.S. citizen. 
Upon her naturalization, Applicant surrendered her Indian passport. (GX 1.) She used 
her United States passport to visit her family in India in 2010, 2012, and 2015, due to 
deaths and illnesses of family members. (Tr. 73.) She was scheduled to return to India 
in July 2016 due to her uncle’s death. (Tr. 87.) Otherwise, Applicant talks to her parents 
on a daily basis. (GX 1.) 
 
Shortly after her arrival in the United States, Applicant’s husband attempted to 
force her to return to India, arguing that because he sponsored her, he could send her 
back to India. However, she refused to leave and her son was born in late 2005. (Tr. 33; 
GX 1.) Between 2005 and 2008, Applicant and her husband continued to experience 
marital difficulties and they ultimately divorced in 2010. (Tr. 31-32.) The relationship 
between Applicant and her ex-husband remained difficult, and Applicant had to move 
several times because he followed her. (Tr. 33.) Because these moves were sudden 
 
4 
 
and unplanned, she not only experienced additional financial strain, but there were also 
times when she was forced to stay the night in her car. (Answer.) Applicant’s ex-
husband initially had some visitation rights with their son, but currently does not. He is 
required to pay an unspecified amount of child support. (Tr. 32.)  
 
Although Applicant has no family here, other than her son, she has chosen to 
remain in the United States, considers it to be her home, and her allegiance is to the 
United States. (Tr. 57; Tr. 36-37.) She has rented the basement in the home of a friend 
since 2010, and Applicant pays that friend to provide after-school care for Applicant’s 
son who attends public elementary school. (Tr. 44.) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties arose in about 2012. (GX 3.) Applicant used much 
of her financial resources for the costs associated with her 2010 divorce. (Answer.) In 
2011, she traded in a car that her husband had significantly damaged for another used 
vehicle. After about two weeks, the car was not running properly and Applicant tried to 
return it to the dealer. However, the dealer refused to accept the return. Applicant then 
traded in the car at another dealership, and purchased another used car from that 
dealer. She lost about $10,000 through these transactions. (Answer; Tr. 43.) In 2012, 
Applicant incurred unanticipated expenses when she had to return to India following her 
brother-in-law’s death in an accident. (Answer.) Also in 2012, Applicant contracted with 
a credit-consolidation company, and made about seven monthly payments of an 
unrecalled amount to the company. After one of her creditors contacted Applicant and 
told her that it had not received any payments in months, she realized that the credit-
consolidation company was not paying her creditors and she stopped making her 
payments. The missed payments on multiple accounts and the loss of the money she 
paid to the credit-consolidation company compounded her financial difficulties. She then 
contacted each of her creditors to make payment arrangements. (Answer.)  
 
Applicant has submitted documentary evidence that shows the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e through 1.g, totaling $13,659, have been paid. (AX K; AX O; 
AX P.) The two remaining delinquent accounts, totaling about $9,755, are owed to the 
same creditor. At the time of the hearing, Applicant had made payment arrangements 
with the creditor, but had yet to make her first payment. (Tr. 46.) She has not incurred 
any delinquent debt since 2012. (GX 4.) She is current on all her ongoing financial 
obligations, and she lives within her means. (GX 4.) She paid off several delinquent 
debts, including a judgment, between 2013 and 2014. (GX 4.)  
 
Although Applicant never received any formal education in English, she speaks 
only English at work, and is considered by her coworkers to be an effective 
communicator. (Tr. 70; AX H; AX I.) However, there were times during the hearing  
when Applicant and counsel had difficulty understanding one another. (Tr. 42; Tr. 45; Tr. 
52; Tr. 55; Tr. 80.) Applicant testified that she did not intentionally falsify her e-QIP, but 
that she did fully not understand the financial questions. (Tr. 51; Tr. 71; Tr. 72; Tr. 81; 
Tr. 86.) She also stated that she did not fully understand the questions the investigator 
 
5 
 
asked her during her personal subject interview in May 2014, and that she found some 
of the questions to be “confusing.” (Tr. 71-72.) Applicant’s responses to the financial 
questions during the interview support her claims. For example, when the investigator 
asked Applicant if she had any delinquent debts, Applicant responded “No.” The 
investigator then questioned Applicant about a specific debt, and Applicant provided the 
details of the debt. The investigator then asked if she had any other delinquent debts 
and Applicant responded “No.” This exchange occurred ten times during the interview. 
(GX 2.)  
  
 Applicant submitted nine letters of reference from coworkers, including one from 
her supervisor of nine years. She is described as reliable, trustworthy, hardworking, 
dedicated, and professional. She is also considered to be friendly and kind. (AX A-I.) 
 
Policies 
 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural 
protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be 
made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
 
6 
 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate 
burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The foreign influence trustworthiness concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a [trustworthiness] concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information.  
 
When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country, as well as each individual family tie, must be considered. ISCR Case 
No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). There is a rebuttable presumption that 
contacts with an immediate family member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR 
Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
   
Although the relationship between the United States and India is largely 
favorable, India has a documented history of collecting U.S proprietary information. 
Also, Indian citizens have been involved in several criminal cases of industrial 
 
7 
 
espionage against the United States. Additionally, India has a poor human rights record 
and terrorist activity is present in many regions. Accordingly, the record contains 
sufficient information to support a finding that Applicant’s relationships create a 
heightened risk of coercion and exploitation. These two disqualifying conditions are 
established. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).   
 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶ 7(a). AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. Applicant’s contacts with her family members 
are frequent and, by their nature, not casual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant has demonstrated her undivided loyalty and 
her ties to the United States, and would resolve any potential conflict of interest that 
could arise from her relationships with family members in India in favor of U.S. interests. 
Specifically, Applicant came to the United States in 2005, and despite the efforts of her 
husband to force her to return to India, and her lack of family in the United States, she 
remained. She has returned to India only for family emergencies. Her family members 
are farmers and reside in an area where terrorist activity is not common. She is 
sponsoring her brother and his family to immigrate to the United States. She effectively 
renounced her Indian citizenship when she became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2010, 
and has traveled to India using only her U.S. passport.  
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise [sensitive] information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
[sensitive] information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
   
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant incurred debt due to circumstances that were largely beyond her 
control, primarily her divorce, her unanticipated moves, and her car problems. She 
initially acted responsibly and in good faith by contracting with a credit-consolidating 
company to repay her creditors. However, the company embezzled her money and she 
fell further behind on the debts. She then contacted each of her creditors and 
methodically resolved five of the seven debts alleged in the SOR, paying more than 
58% of the total alleged debt. She has arranged a payment plan with the remaining 
creditor. She also repaid several significant delinquent debts prior to the issuance of the 
SOR. “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A trustworthiness adjudication is an evaluation 
of a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection 
procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required 
to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a 
plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
The adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR 
be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
  
 Applicant has not incurred any recent delinquent, and currently lives within her 
means. The circumstances which led to her indebtedness are unlikely to recur, and do 
not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(d) apply. Applicant has addressed and is repaying her debts in a responsible 
manner. Although her financial record is not perfect, she has implemented a reasonable 
plan to resolve her financial issues within her means, as well as a track record of debt 
resolution. 
 
 
10 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the [trustworthiness] process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the [trustworthiness] process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a) (“deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.”) 
  
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 I found Applicant’s explanation of her omissions on her e-QIP to be credible and 
consistent with the record evidence, and her demeanor to be honest, forthcoming, and 
candid. Therefore, I conclude that she did not intentionally falsify her e-QIP. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
11 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B, F, and E in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but I have also considered the following: 
 Applicant has worked for the same employer for nearly nine years, and is held in 
high esteem by her supervisor and coworkers. She is a hard-working and dedicated 
single mother who has worked a second job for over three years in order to improve her 
financial circumstances. Despite her ex-husband’s efforts to force her to return to India, 
she stood her ground and remained in the United States, to which she pledges her 
allegiance. She is sponsoring her brother and his family to move to the United States.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    For Applicant 
    
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
