KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A prima facie case has not been established that a due process violation or any error
occurred.  Applicant is asking for a remedy not available to him.  The Appeal Board is only
authorized to remand a case to correct an identified error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-04743.a1
DATE: 10/14/2016
DATE: October 14, 2016   
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04743
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 29, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On July 22, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
In his appeal, Applicant essentially requests that his case be remanded due to circumstances
that did not allow him to present information in the time allotted.  As best we can discern from his
appeal, he was on a work assignment three time zones away from his home and was not permitted
to contact people and companies (presumably creditors or character witnesses) while at work.  He
apparently is claiming those circumstances precluded him from being able to obtain documentary
evidence.  He does not allege the Judge committed any error. 
The SOR alleged 21 delinquent debts totaling about $66,000.  At the hearing on May 11,
2016, Applicant testified, but did not present any witnesses or documentary evidence.  The Judge
left the record open until July 11, 2016 (approximately 60 days) for Applicant to present
documentation.  He did not present any documentation before the record closed.  There is no
indication in the appeal, decision, or record that Applicant requested an extension of time for
submitting post-hearing documentation.  A prima facie case has not been established that a due
process violation or any error occurred.  To the extent that a party fails to present evidence for
consideration by the Judge, the party waives the opportunity to have such evidence considered. 
ISCR Case No. 00-0250 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 13, 2001).
Applicant is asking for a remedy not available to him.  The Appeal Board is only authorized
to remand a case to correct an identified error.  Directive ¶ E3.1.33.2.  A request for a remand so
Applicant can present new evidence does not constitute the correction of an identified error.  “It is
well settled that ‘absent a showing that an applicant was denied a reasonable opportunity to prepare
for the hearing or was denied a reasonable opportunity to present evidence on his or her behalf, an
applicant is not entitled to receive a new hearing just so the applicant can have another chance to
present his or her case.’”  ISCR Case No. 14-03347 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2016).  Compare ISCR
Case 00-0250 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 13, 2001) (“If the Board were to grant Applicant’s request for a
new hearing or allow her to submit new evidence in this case, then the Board would be giving her
special treatment and denying other, similarly-situated applicants of their right to receive the fair,
impartial, and even-handed application of Executive Order 10865 and the Directive.”)  
The Appeal Board does not review cases de novo.  Our authority to review a case is limited
to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has
not made an allegation of harmful error.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a
security clearance is affirmed.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan      
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy         
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
