KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant notes that she has only two brothers, rather than the three alleged in the
SOR. The Judge’s findings and analysis refer only to two brothers, in accordance with the other
evidence before him.  His unfavorable formal finding under 2.c does not mean that he
exaggerated the security significance of Applicant’s family connections in Ukraine, nor is there
reason to believe that the wording of the SOR impaired Applicant’s ability to prepare her case
for mitigation. Adverse decision affirmed..  
CASENO: 14-06788.a1
DATE: 10/21/2016
DATE: October 21, 2016
In Re:
-----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-06788
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
10, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign
Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 12, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact are
erroneous; whether the Judge failed to consider all of the evidence; and whether the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable
findings under Guideline C are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal:  Applicant
was born, raised, and educated in Ukraine.  She came to the U.S. in the early 2000s, marrying a U.S.
citizen at that time.  She became a naturalized citizen in the late 2000s and has worked for a Federal
contractor since 2008.  
Applicant’s mother is a Ukrainian citizen who is a resident alien of the U.S.  She divides her
time between Ukraine and this country.  She worked for a Ukranian government organization. 
Applicant’s father receives a government pension and spends his entire time in Ukraine.  The mother
has applied for resident alien status for Applicant’s two brothers, which was pending as of the close
of the record.  The brothers plan to move to the U.S. as soon as they receive their green cards.  The
older brother was at one time a social worker for the government and currently works in a Ukranian
industry.  The younger brother lives in another European country and works for a U.S. corporation. 
Applicant communicates with her parents several times a week.
In 2012, Applicant stated to a clearance investigator that she was not willing to renounce her
Ukranian citizenship or surrender her Ukrainian passport.  She was concerned that, were she to
surrender her citizenship, she would not be permitted to reapply for it at a later date.  In January
2016, Applicant surrendered her Ukrainian passport to her facility security officer.  
Russia recently seized the Crimean peninsula in response to actions of the Ukrainian
parliament in establishing a new government.  Russia has been accused of orchestrating attacks by
separatist factions, and there have been human rights abuses resulting from Russian occupation of
Crimea.  Russia has continued to supply heavy weapons to separatists, and Ukrainian security is
under threat.  Separatist groups have kidnapped foreigners, including U.S. citizens.  Russia is an
aggressive collector of U.S. proprietary information.  It is “one of the most capable and persistent
intelligence threats and aggressive practitioner of economic espionage against the U.S.”  Decision
at 5.  This is a growing threat to U.S. security.
2
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge entered favorable findings under Guideline C.  In resolving the Guideline B
allegations against Applicant, the Judge cited to evidence of her close family ties in Ukraine and her
frequent contact with them, circumstances that render her vulnerable to coercion.  He also noted that
Applicant was not willing to renounce her Ukrainian citizenship and only recently surrendered her
passport to her facility security officer.  Given Ukraine’s instability, Russia’s support for separatists
in that country, and the governmental jobs held by some of her family members at one time or
another, the Judge concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the Guideline B concerns. 
 
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes matters from outside the record, which we cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant notes that she has only two brothers, rather than the three alleged
in SOR ¶ 2.c.  In fact, the Judge’s findings and analysis refer only to two brothers, in accordance
with Applicant’s SOR response and the other evidence before him.  His unfavorable formal finding
under 2.c does not mean that he exaggerated the security significance of Applicant’s family
connections in Ukraine, nor is there reason to believe that the wording of the SOR impaired
Applicant’s ability to prepare her case for mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App.
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
Applicant cites to record evidence, e.g., that her brothers are seeking to become permanent
U.S. residents and that her mother splits her time between Ukraine and this country.  She also points
to her having surrendered her passport.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence
in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05795 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).  The Judge made
findings about the evidence that Applicant mentions in her brief and included much of it into his
analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record.  Neither has she shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27,
2016).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed; James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
