 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-04539 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated personal conduct security concerns raised by a number of 
relatively minor arrests that occurred when he was younger. Nearly six years have 
passed since he was last arrested or charged with any offense. During this period, he 
has demonstrated favorable and significant lifestyle changes. However, he did not 
mitigate security concerns raised by his financial situation. Specifically, he failed to 
provide sufficient evidence showing that he has taken reasonable and responsible steps 
to address his delinquent debts. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the personal conduct 
and financial considerations guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
determination based on the administrative (written) record.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 On April 14, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains, in pertinent part: Applicant’s 
security clearance application (SCA), a summary of his security clearance interview 
(clearance interview), an F.B.I. criminal record report, a February 2014 credit report, 
and 2005 bankruptcy court records. These exhibits were pre-marked as Items 4 – 8 and 
are admitted into the administrative record without objection.2  
 
 Applicant submitted an April 2016 credit report in response to the FORM. This 
report was marked and admitted into the record as Item 9. On December 6, 2016, I was 
assigned Applicant’s case. After confirming Applicant’s sponsorship for a clearance by 
his employer, which provides the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals continuing 
jurisdiction over the matter, the record closed.3 See generally Directive ¶ 4.4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in his early forties, is married with eight children (three of whom 
are stepchildren). He is employed by a defense contractor as a systems administrator 
and has been with his current employer since April 2013. He earned an associate’s 
degree in 2013 and is pursuing a bachelor’s degree. He submitted an SCA in December 
2013 in connection with his job.  
 
Financial 
 
Applicant has been unable to pay his debts for over a decade. He filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005, discharging approximately $6,700 in debt. At the time, 
Applicant’s debts primarily consisted of a repossessed vehicle and a few delinquent 
credit cards. He was unemployed and underemployed for long periods of time from 
2009 to April 2013, when he was hired by his current employer.  
 
From 2009 to the present, Applicant incurred approximately $10,000 in 
delinquent debt, primarily consisting of past-due child support and overdue state taxes. 
Applicant revealed his past-due child support debt on his SCA and discussed it during 
his clearance interview. In February 2011, he was sentenced to 180 days of work 
release and probation for failing to pay court-ordered child support for two of his 
children. As of the March 2014 clearance interview, Applicant’s wages were being 
garnished to satisfy back child support totaling about $7,000 for these two children.  
 
It is unclear from the record whether Applicant has court-ordered child support for 
his other children and the t status of his child support accounts. He did not provide 
documentation from the state’s child support enforcement agency (CSEU) reflecting his 
current account balance(s). Instead, Applicant is relying on Item 9, the April 2016 credit 
report, which reflects a CSEU collection account for $198 that was closed in January 
2010. No other delinquent child support account is reflected on Item 9. However, a 
$5,081 collection account for delinquent child support is listed on Item 7. Based on the 
                                                          
2 Items 1 – 3 are the SOR, Answer, and the cover letter accompanying the SOR. 
 
3 See Appellate Exhibit I. 
 
3 
 
(unclear) state of the record evidence, I find that the past-due child support debt 
referenced in SOR 2.g remains unresolved.  
 
Applicant also discussed during his clearance interview that he had unpaid state 
taxes from 2007, which were reduced to a lien in 2010. Applicant claimed to be on a 
payment plan to satisfy the debt. He submitted no documentation reflecting such 
payments and both credit reports (Items 7 and 9) reflect this tax debt. The state tax debt 
is referenced in SOR 2.b and remains unresolved.  
 
As for the consumer-related debts listed at SOR 2.c – 2.f, Applicant claims he 
either successfully disputed the debt or they no longer appear on his current credit 
report. Applicant provided no corroborating documentation showing that he settled, 
paid, or otherwise resolved these SOR debts or reasonable basis upon which to dispute 
the alleged debts. Each of the debts are listed on Item 7.  
 
Applicant did not submit evidence of having sought or received financial 
counseling. His current credit report, Item 9, reflects a credit score considered “fair.” 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 From 2009 to 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged eight times with 
relatively minor offenses. Most of these arrests resulted in charges that were nolle 
prossed (not prosecuted).  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA by failing to 
disclose a 2005 arrest for marijuana possession. Applicant denies he deliberately 
falsified the SCA. He disclosed other pertinent criminal history information, including the 
non-criminal charges for failing to pay his court-ordered child support. He discussed the 
drug-related arrest during his March 2014 clearance interview, which occurred a few 
months after submitting the SCA. He and several others were arrested after police 
stopped the car he was riding in and found marijuana in the car. The charge was nolle 
prossed after another person in the car confessed to the offense. Applicant denies he 
was involved with drugs on this occasion, and the record is devoid of any suggestion 
that he was involved with illegal drugs on any other occasion.  
 
Applicant earned an associate’s degree and started working for his current 
employer in 2013. He is currently pursuing a bachelor’s degree. He has not been 
arrested or charged with any offense in over five years.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.4  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The personal conduct security concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
                                                          
4 See also ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016); ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 2011). 
 
5 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA by not listing his 
2005 drug-related arrest. This alleged conduct raises the above concern and, 
specifically, the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
 The security clearance process depends heavily upon the honesty of all 
applicants. An applicant must disclose relevant matters that are responsive to questions 
on the SCA. However, the omission of material, adverse information standing alone is 
not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified an SCA. An omission is 
not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently 
overlooked or misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the information did not 
need to be reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.5 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SCA. He listed several pieces of relevant, 
adverse information on the SCA, including the non-criminal matter for failing to pay his 
court-ordered child support. Moreover, he fully discussed the drug-related arrest and 
other pertinent background information during his clearance interview in March 2014. 
This interview took place shortly after he submitted the SCA. Such actions are 
inconsistent with a person trying to misrepresent his background. After considering all 
the evidence and drawing all reasonable inferences therefrom, I find for Applicant on 
SOR 1.i, the falsification allegation. 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s past arrests for relatively minor offenses 
raises a security concern under the personal conduct guideline. Applicant’s past 
conduct tends to raise questions about his judgment, reliability, and other pertinent 
character traits required of a prospective clearance holder. See AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d). 
Applicant mitigated these concerns through demonstrated, positive lifestyle changes, as 
evidenced by his educational achievements and good employment record over the past 
four years. Furthermore, he has not been arrested or charged with any offense in over 
five years. Therefore, based on the record evidence, I find that the mitigating conditions 
listed at AG ¶¶ 17(c) through 17(e) apply in full or in part and, when considered together 
with the whole-person factors present in this case, mitigate the security concerns raised 
by the allegations in SOR 1.a – 1.h. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
                                                          
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an applicant with financial problems might be tempted to compromise classified 
information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent 
to which an applicant’s delinquent debts cast doubt upon their judgment, self-control, 
and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.6 
 
The record evidence reflects that Applicant has a history of not meeting his 
financial obligations and, at a minimum, has been unable to pay his debts. This record 
evidence raises the above security concern and establishes the disqualifying conditions 
at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines provide for a number of conditions that can mitigate 
the financial considerations security concern. I have considered all the relevant 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s recent financial 
problems appear to be attributable to a long stretch of unstable employment. Although it 
can take a person time to address and resolve financial problems stemming from 
matters beyond their control, Applicant has been gainfully employed with his current 
employer for nearly four years. He presented no documentation showing that in that 
time he has taken responsible steps to address the SOR debts. He also presented no 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
7 
 
evidence reflecting the receipt of financial counseling and limited information from which 
I could conclude that his current financial situation is under control.7  
 
 Applicant appears to rest his case on the fact that a majority of the SOR debts, 
including his delinquent child support account, no longer appear on a recent credit 
report. However, the fact that several SOR debts are no longer being reported by one 
the three credit reporting agencies is on its own of limited evidentiary value in assessing 
a person’s suitability for access to classified information.8 Moreover, the reliability of this 
recent credit report in assessing Applicant’s suitability is questionable. Of note, the 
credit report’s only entry regarding a delinquent child support account relates to one that 
was closed months before Applicant was sentenced for failing to pay his court-imposed 
child support obligation and had his wages garnished. Applicant was on notice that this 
derogatory information raised a security concern and elected not to provide clear 
evidence, such as, a printout from his child support account with CSEU, showing that he 
responsibly addressed his delinquent child support obligation and the other SOR debts.9 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. 
They are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve 
the delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.10 Here, Applicant failed to meet his burden. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 An administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the relevant 
circumstances, including the whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I gave due 
consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, including 
Applicant’s honesty during the security clearance process and the relatively low amount 
of delinquent debt at issue. However, Applicant’s failure to provide clear evidence 
showing that he has responsibly addressed his delinquent debts, especially two debts 
involving basic and fundamental financial obligations – one derived from citizenship, the 
other through parenthood – raises continuing doubts about his ability and willingness to 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2016) (reasonable to expect an applicant to present 
documentation regarding their efforts to address and resolve SOR debts).  
 
8 ISCR Case No. 14-04926 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2016) (“A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill legal 
obligations, such as paying taxes, providing child support, and addressing other debts in a reasonable 
manner, does not demonstrate the high degree of reliability required of those granted access to classified 
information.”)  
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 15-03527 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2016) (affirming denial where applicant failed to 
present clear evidence regarding his/her efforts to address an SOR debt that no longer appeared on his 
credit report). At the same time, Department Counsel’s reliance on a credit report that was already quite 
dated (over two years old) at the time the FORM was issued seems imprudent.  
 
10 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
8 
 
discharge his security obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts 
about his present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.g:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
