 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-02413 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 12, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 19, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 17, 2015. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On February 9, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
was provided to the Applicant on February 10, 2016. He was given the opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on February 18, 2016.  
 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed 
that would have expired on March 19, 2016.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 
6 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on October 22, 2014. Applicant did not adopt it as his 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this 
Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on September 9, 2016. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.n, 1.o, 1.r, 
1.s, and both allegations in Paragraph 2. He admitted all other allegations in Paragraph 
1. (Items 2-6)  
 
Applicant is 39 years old and never has married. He works for a defense 
contractor. (Item 3) 
 
 The SOR has 19 allegations of delinquent debts totaling $62,244. There are five 
student loans listed totaling $27,363. Other delinquent debts are: 11 credit cards or 
loans totaling $34,374; and three other debts of $169 each, which total $507, owed for 
telephone company fees and shown by different account numbers. Applicant claims he 
is current on his student loans, some loans are duplicates such as the three telephone 
changes, and he is paying other loans. He does not submit documentary proof of any 
resolution of any of the listed 19 debts. He refers to “snippets” of credit reports to show 
his current debt status. (SOR; Answer) 
 
 Applicant’s five SOR-listed student loans started in 1999 (Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.j, 
1.k, 1.n, and 1.o). His Answer asserts his student loans are current. Applicant also 
submitted excerpts from credit reports dated September 30, 2015, showing his seven 
student loans are “open and current.” However, no account numbers or amounts are 
listed for the debts. Applicant did not explain the difference in the number of student 
loans in any document. None are resolved. (Answer; Items 4, 5) 
 
 The SOR lists three telephone debts for $169 (Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.r, and 1.s). 
There is one debt in this amount shown on the February 20, 2015 credit report and then 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
listed twice on the August 29, 2014 credit report (pages 13 and 14) with different 
account numbers being collected by two different collection agencies but owed to the 
same telephone company. They are the same debt based on the delinquency dates 
listed in the credit reports. They are duplicates listed in the SOR. The “snippet” of the 
credit report submitted by Applicant from two credit reporting agencies dated November 
13, 2015, shows one $169 debt was a paid collection. This one $169 debt is resolved. 
(Answer; Items 4, 5 at pages 13 and 14) 
 
 The SOR lists 11 other delinquent debts that originated between 1999 and 2015. 
Applicant’s Answer states he recognized his mistake after “working with a field officer.” 
He does not disclose whom he means by that designation. He also claims several of his 
debts are duplicates of others listed in the SOR but does not submit any documents to 
demonstrate the validity of his assertion (Subparagraphs 1.e, 1.l, and 1m). His credit 
reports also each show a credit card debt owed to a bank as listed in Subparagraph 1.c 
in the amount of $2,378. The account was opened in 2001. Applicant states he is 
current on paying this account without submitting any objective evidence concerning its 
status. He also claims two debts were dropped from his credit report (Subparagraphs 
1.g.and 1.i). He did not explain if they were paid or merely old enough to be dropped by 
the credit reporting agencies. (Answer; Items 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant did not file a response to the FORM. Therefore, the status of his 
delinquent debts between at least November 17, 2015, when he answered the SOR and 
February 18, 2016, when he received the FORM is not known. He did not submit any 
documents showing when he paid on any debts (other than one telephone debt) or the 
amount of money paid on each debt. He merely submitted a statement that he was 
paying his debts. It is not persuasive without payment information. (Item 1)  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose a judgment against him by Citibank and 
whether he was currently delinquent on any federal debt (Subparagraph 2.a). Applicant 
answered “yes” to the e-QIP Section 26 question and disclosed a judgment owed to 
“Discover bank” that he claimed he paid, but failed to disclose the judgment against him 
by Citibank (Subparagraph 1.h) for $4,612 or any of his delinquent federal student loans 
(listed in Subparagraph 1.a, 1.j, 1.k, 1.n, and 1.o). Applicant claimed he made an honest 
mistake by listing a judgment owed to “Discover bank” and not the Citibank judgment 
listed in the credit reports. His only e-QIP explanation for the “Discover” judgment was 
that he “fell behind due to financial set back/overextended.” Applicant’s Answer asserts 
that as of its date his student loans were current. He does not make any declaration 
about the status of his student loans on the date he signed the e-QIP. On the credit 
report dated August 29, 2014, 17 days after Applicant completed the e-QIP, the 
judgment by Citibank is listed. Applicant knew he had that judgment and failed to 
disclose it. (Items 3, 5)  
 
 Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his delinquent debts in response to the e-
QIP Section 26 that asked if he had any bills turned over to a collection agency, an 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay, or whether 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
he was over 120 days delinquent on any debt (Subparagraph 2.b). Applicant answered 
“no” to all questions regarding his financial delinquencies. All of the delinquent debts 
listed in the SOR are also set forth in the two credit reports in the file. Applicant had 
many delinquent debts at the time he completed his e-QIP and should have disclosed 
all of them on his e-QIP. (Item 3-5) 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 1999 to the present, Applicant accumulated 19 delinquent debts, totaling 
$62,244 that remained unpaid or unresolved when the SOR was written. These two 
disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No mitigating condition has any applicability: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant’s debts remain delinquent. Some were opened in 1999 and their 
current status remains the same for all but three small $169 debts owed to a telephone 
company. They are the same debt but listed three times. There are no unusual 
circumstances involved in these debts. Their existence casts doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment by his failure to show any current 
resolution of more than three minor debts. AG ¶ 20 (a) is not established. 
 
Applicant’s debts were not beyond his control. He incurred them and failed to pay 
them. He has not acted responsibly in trying to resolve the delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20 
(b) is not established.  
 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling and there is no evidence his 
financial problems are under control or being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) is not established.  
 
Applicant has not shown any evidence he has made a good faith effort to resolve 
his delinquent debts, except for the $169 debt owed to the telephone company. AG ¶ 20 
(d) applies partially.  
 
Appellant has not shown any reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of his 
debts. He did not provide any documents to show the basis of any dispute or that he 
took any action to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20 (e) is not established.  
 
Finally, there is no evidence of legal affluence affecting Applicant’s ability to pay 
his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20 (f) is not relevant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose his financial delinquencies as alleged in SOR 
Paragraph 2. He has 19 delinquent debts and listed only a paid off judgment on a credit 
card to “Discover bank.” He did not disclose his delinquent federal loan debts. He made 
only one financial delinquency disclosure, while he knew he had other delinquent debts. 
His e-QIP explanation for the judgment was that he could not pay the debt because of 
financial overextension. AG ¶ 16 (a) is established. 
 
There are seven mitigating conditions under the Personal Conduct guideline. 
None of them apply to Applicant. 
 
Applicant did not make prompt efforts to correct his answers in Section 26 of the 
e-QIP, as required in AG ¶ 17 (a). There is no evidence of improper or inadequate 
advice from authorized personnel or an attorney, which is required in AG ¶ 17 (b). The 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
falsification is not minor or unique, it does not have any other qualities set forth in AG ¶ 
17 (c). There is no evidence of counseling of any type or acknowledgement of his 
falsifying behavior, nor any evidence of steps to reduce his vulnerability, so AG ¶ 17 (d) 
and (e) do not apply. The information is substantiated, so AG ¶ 17 (f) does not apply. 
There are no criminals involved so AG ¶ 17 (g) does not apply. Therefore, none of the 
mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his financial history 
on his e-QIP. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. He has not taken any action to resolve 
his delinquent debts except for the one $169 debt. This inaction leaves him vulnerable 
to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on the magnitude of his financial 
obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is obviously voluntary. His 
inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good 
judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued lack of appropriate 
judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts during the past 
seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e., 1.g to 1.q: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.r, and 1.s:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
