 Exhibit 3 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-02836
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for
access to classified information. He did not present sufficient documentary evidence to
mitigate the concern stemming from two unpaid tax liens for about $25,000 and ten
collection or past-due accounts. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on January 9, 2013.  Nearly three years later on November1
19, 2015, after reviewing the application and information gathered during a background
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a statement of reasons2
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
2
(SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to3
a complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant answered the SOR on December 19,
2015.     
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so the case
will be decided on the written record.  On January 21, 2016, Department Counsel4
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  The5
file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on February
15, 2016. He did not reply within the 30-day period from receipt of the FORM. The case
was assigned to me on August 23, 2016.    
Procedural Matters 
The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.g is amended sua sponte to conform to the evidence,
which shows that the $7,920 tax lien in question is a state tax lien, not a federal tax lien.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job
as a aircraft mechanic for a company working in the defense industry. He has been so
employed since 2009. Before that, he was employed in a similar capacity with different
companies during 2006–2009. His employment history includes 20 years of active duty
military service, which ended with his retirement in 2006. He is married and has three
adult children.  
Under Guideline F, the SOR, as amended, alleges the following: (1) a $7,920
state tax lien filed in September 2011; (2) a $17,744 federal tax lien filed in August
2012; and (3) ten collection or past-due accounts for a total of about $3,629. In his
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and provided brief
explanations for some of the items. In addition to his admissions, the SOR allegations
are established by information contained in credit reports from January 2013, March
 Exhibits 4, 5, and 6. 6
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
3
2015, and October 2015.  He did not submit supporting documentation with his answer6
to the SOR. Likewise, did not submit documentation in response to the FORM.
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 18
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant19
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  20
4
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it17
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant18
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 19
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  20
The concern under Guideline F is broader than the possibility that a person might
knowingly compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  21
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).22
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).23
5
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial
history within the meaning of Guideline F.  I reach that conclusion based on the21
findings of fact that show Applicant has two outstanding tax liens for more than $25,000
and has several unpaid collection or past-due accounts. The state and federal tax liens
demonstrate that Applicant owes back taxes for the relevant tax years, tax authorities
filed the liens several years ago in 2011 and 2012, and those matters remain
unresolved. He presented no documentation to show that the tax liens and the other
delinquent accounts were paid, settled, in repayment, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise
resolved. 
 I have considered the six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and conclude22
that Applicant has not presented sufficient information to explain, extenuate, or mitigate
the facts proven by the written record. He has not presented a reasonable plan to
resolve his delinquent debts, nor has he demonstrated a firm commitment to adhering to
a plan. The facts do not support application of AG ¶ 20(c), the problem is being resolved
or is under control, or AG ¶ 20(d), making a good-faith effort to repay. Simply put,
Applicant has known or should have known for some time that his tax problems were a
concern in the security clearance process, he has had sufficient time and opportunity to
address his tax problems, and yet those matters are unresolved. His inability or
unwillingness or procrastination in dealing with his tax problems raises doubts about his
judgment and willingness to follow rules and regulations. 
The concern over Applicant’s problematic financial history creates doubt about
his current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I23
conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.l: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
