 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02301 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 29, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
June 13, 2016, scheduling the hearing for July 22, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He did not submit any additional documents. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 1989 until he retired with an honorable discharge in 2010. 
He has worked for his current employer since 2010. He seeks to retain a security 
clearance, which he has held since his time in the military. He attended college for a 
period, but he has not earned a degree. He is married but separated with two children, 
ages 23 and 17.1 
 
 Applicant and his wife separated in about 2010. He moved to another state after 
retiring from the military, and he left his children with his wife. At about the same time, 
his parents’ health took a downturn. His parents lived several hours away, but he drove 
multiple times a week to help care for them. He also handled their financial affairs until 
they both passed away in 2011. He served as the executor of their estates, which also 
involved considerable time. While he was helping his parents and taking care of their 
estates, he neglected his personal financial responsibilities. He also admitted that he 
was “scattered” and “overwhelmed.” He did not file federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2010 through 2014 when they were due.2   
 
 Applicant reported on his August 2012 Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) that he did not file his tax returns for tax years 2010 and 2011. He 
wrote that he had secured an agency to assist him in filing his returns as soon as he 
recovered his documentation. When he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in October 2012, he stated that he intended to hire a certified public 
accountant (CPA) during the upcoming tax season to file the returns and settle any 
arrearages owed.3 
 
 Applicant filed his federal income tax returns for 2011 and 2012 in about October 
2015. His returns indicated that he owed $9,246 for $2011 and $8,998 for $2012. Those 
figures do not account for penalties and interest. He indicated that he intends to file 
amended returns, which might reduce or increase his tax liability. He has not filed 
returns for tax years 2010, 2013, and 2014. The IRS is levying his wages $402 every 
two weeks. As of July 22, 2016, the IRS had collected $9,112 from his pay during 2016. 
Applicant stated that he thought he owed about $20,000 before his wages were levied. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-28; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-24, 29-34, 41, 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. The SOR only alleged that Applicant 
did not file income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2012. Any matter that was not alleged in the 
SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be used in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in the whole-person analysis. 
3 GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
He increased the amount withheld from his pay in about 2015, which would lower the 
amount of taxes owed, if any, for that year. He stated that he intends to file all his 
returns and pay his back taxes.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
                                                          
4 Tr. at 17, 20-25, 36-39; AE A-C. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2010 through 2012 federal income tax returns when 
they were due. AG ¶ 19(g) is applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant helped his parents when they were ill. He was the executor of their 
estates after they passed away in 2011. His commitment to his parents before and after 
their deaths is commendable. However, he knew when he submitted the SF 86 in 2012 
that his unfiled tax returns were a problem. During his background interview in October 
2012, he stated that he intended to hire a CPA to file the returns. Despite his stated 
intentions to file all his returns and pay his back taxes, he still has not filed all his 
returns, and he owes the IRS an unknown amount.  
 
 The Appeal Board has stated that “[f]ailure to file tax returns suggests that an 
applicant has a problem with complying with well-established governmental rules and 
systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting 
classified information.” See ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). The 
 
5 
 
Appeal Board has further held that an applicant’s “repeated failure to file his Federal 
income tax returns in a timely manner does not demonstrate the high degree of good 
judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to classified information.” 
See ISCR Case No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016).  
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are no applicable 
mitigating conditions. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his steady employment 
with a defense contractor. I also considered his commitment to his parents. However, 
he failed in his fundamental obligations to file his tax returns and pay his taxes. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
