 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02265 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Kataukas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 18, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on January 29, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on February 8, 2016. As of August 3, 2016, he had not responded. 
The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2016.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government exhibits identified as Items 5, 7, 8, and 11 are admitted in 
evidence. Items 6, 9, and 10 consist of reports of investigation (ROIs) prepared by the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) during Applicant’s background investigation. 
Section E3.1.20 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive states that “[a]n ROI may be received 
with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal 
Rules of Evidence.” There was no authenticating witness so the documents are 
inadmissible absent a waiver by Applicant. Department Counsel informed Applicant of 
his right to object to Item 6, which is an ROI of an interview conducted of Applicant. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM, which I consider a waiver of his right to object 
to the document. Item 6 is admitted in evidence. Department Counsel did not inform 
Applicant of his right to object to Items 9 and 10, which are ROIs of criminal records and 
motor vehicles records. There was no waiver to the admissibility of Items 9 and 10. 
They are not admitted in evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2014. He is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. He attended college for a period, but he did not earn a degree. He has never 
married. He has an 11-year-old child.1 
 
Applicant has an extensive record of criminal arrests and motor vehicle 
violations. He was arrested or cited 18 times between 2004 and June 2013 for: 
trespassing on church or school property (August 2004); driving under revocation or 
suspension (January 2005; April 2005; July 2005; August 2005; August 2009; June 
2011); possession of marijuana (June 2005); failure to appear in court or contempt of 
court (November 2005; March 2008; June 2009; October 2009; July 2010; October 
2010); reckless driving and speeding (June 2008); driving under suspension and 
possession of marijuana (February 2009); driving under revocation or suspension and 
receiving stolen property (October 2010); and carrying a concealed weapon (June 
2013). A number of the arrests and citations resulted in convictions and fines. Some of 
the charges were dismissed.2 
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling about $8,588. Applicant admitted 
owing all the debts. The largest debt ($4,527) is for child support arrearages. Applicant 
stated that his financial problems resulted from having to pay child support and his 
many fines. There is no evidence that any of the debts have been paid. However, it 
appears that his child support and arrearages are being garnished from his pay. The 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 6. 
 
2 Items 4-6, 11. 
 
3 
 
September 2014 credit reports lists a balance of $4,784, and the February 2015 credit 
report lists the balance as $4,527.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
August 2014. He reported his criminal record and his financial problems. He discussed 
the same matters with the OPM investigator during his background investigation in 
September 2014.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
3 Items 4-8. 
 
4 Items 5, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant stated that his financial problems resulted from having to pay child 
support and his many fines. There is no evidence that any of the debts have been paid. 
However, his child support arrearages are being garnished from his pay. That is 
insufficient to mitigate the concerns about Applicant’s finances.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
6 
 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
Applicant’s criminal acts and motor vehicle violations reflect questionable 
judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. They also created 
a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) 
are applicable. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
Applicant receives credit for being forthcoming about his record. AG ¶ 17(c) is 
applicable. However, his record of disregarding the law is too long and too recent to be 
mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.r:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
