 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00972 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on November 22, 2015, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 4, 2016, setting the 
hearing for March 31, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. I 
 
2 
 
marked Department Counsel’s exhibit list as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified 
and offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. 
He submitted AE E through J, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all SOR allegations and offered detailed explanations 
concerning the status of each account. After a review of the pleadings, transcript, and 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and has worked for government contractors since 2001. 
He has a Ph.D. He is married, but has no children. He served in the Navy for three 
years before he was discharged. He has held a security clearance since 2003.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant incurred a judgment against him in the amount of 
$1,648; incurred two federal tax liens, one in 2010 for $29,031, and a second in 2011 
for $75,590; incurred 19 delinquent medical debts in the amount of $7,296; and filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 1995 and 2005. Debts were discharged as a result 
of both bankruptcies. His judgment, tax liens, debts, and bankruptcies were listed on 
credit reports from May 2014, January 2015, and August 2015, bankruptcy court 
records, and his personal subject interview (PSI) from July 2014.2  
 
 Applicant explained that the 1995 bankruptcy was due to making bad decisions 
when he was young and incurring significant credit card debt. He estimated the total 
amount of debt discharged was approximately $20,000. The primary cause of his 
second bankruptcy in 2005 was debt incurred by his former significant other. That 
relationship broke-up, but Applicant was saddled with approximately $155,000 worth of 
debt and thus sought bankruptcy protection.3 
 
 In 2012, Applicant experienced significant medical issues, some requiring 
multiple surgeries. His insurance paid the majority of the expenses, but approximately 
$10,000 worth of medical expenses remained his responsibility. The status of the 
judgment, liens, and debts is as follows:4 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 25-26, 48; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 53-56; Answer; GE 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-31; Answer; GE 1; AE A, E. 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (judgment $1,648): 
 
 Applicant documented an established payment plan for this judgment. He has 
paid $20 monthly since September 2014. This judgment includes the debts that are 
listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.s, and 1.t. This debt is being resolved.5  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.c (federal tax liens for 2011 and 2010 $75,590; $29,031): 
 
 Applicant explained that he incorrectly filed his tax returns from about 2002 to 
2010 when some of his income was from self-employment. This resulted in the filing of 
the two tax liens. He entered a payment agreement with the IRS in 2009 and was 
making monthly payments of $2,100, but had to stop when he became ill in about 2012. 
He presented documented proof that from 2014 through 2015 he made monthly 
payments of $1,500 to the IRS. From August 2015 through the present his payments 
are $1,150 and he provided documentation that he has made those payments up 
through March 2016 and will continue to make them. The tax lien reflected in SOR ¶ 1.c 
was released in April 2015. He has reduced his total tax debt down to approximately 
$45,000. This tax issue is being resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.v (medical debts $7,296): 
 
 Applicant incurred a number of debts resulting from his medical issues. When he 
could not pay the original medical providers in a timely manner many of the debts were 
passed on to collection agencies, sometimes more than once. Applicant attempted to 
negotiate settlements or payment plans with the original providers only to find out that 
he needed to contact some collection agency. Applicant documented proof of several 
payment plans he established to pay these debts. He also documented payments of 
medical debts that may not be listed on the SOR. Although each specific SOR medical 
debt may not be addressed by his payments, it is clear that he is making a good-faith 
effort to pay his medical debts and supported that effort with documentation. These 
debts are being resolved.7 
 
Current Finances: 
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report shows he is in good standing. His monthly 
income after taxes is approximately $6,716. He has $3,000 in his checking account and 
$13,000 in a 401K retirement account. He provides about $300 monthly to his parents 
to supplement their Social Security. He did not seek any financial counseling.8 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 58; AE A-B, E-F.  
 
6 Tr. at 31, 49-52; Answer; AE A, G. 
 
7 Tr. at 58, 63-65, 71, 74; Answer; AE A-F, H-I.  
 
8 Tr. at 88-89, 93, 101; AE D.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had two bankruptcies, a judgment, federal tax liens, and medical debts 
that he failed to pay over an extended period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant had debts discharged from two earlier bankruptcies. Applicant is paying 
his SOR debts and is reducing his tax liability. Since he has made efforts to repair his 
 
6 
 
financial position, it is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, 
nor do they cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
The circumstances that led to Applicant’s financial problems, his medical 
condition, was a condition beyond his control. He acted responsibly by setting up 
payment plans to resolve his judgment, medical debts, and tax liability. He has reduced 
his tax liability by approximately $60,000. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant did not receive financial counselling. He made good-faith efforts to pay 
his debts with the resources he had at the time. He continues to resolve his medical and 
tax debts. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies and ¶ 20(d) fully applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and the personal circumstances that 
contributed to his financial problems. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about 
the circumstances that led to his debts. He took reasonable actions to resolve them. I 
find it unlikely that Applicant will be in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.x:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
