 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00922 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
August 11, 2014. On August 28, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR on December 10, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on January 20, 2016.  
 
 A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit documentary material to refute, extenuate, 
mitigate or explain the trustworthiness concerns. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 5, 2016. She did not submit a response to the FORM or assert any objections 
to the Government’s evidence. The case was assigned to me on August 28, 2016. The 
Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 6) are admitted into evidence. 
 
 Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.h 
through 1.k, since the debts were paid prior to issuance of the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has seven delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$60,525. Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f., and denied the remaining 
allegations. The evidence supports the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old and is employed as an inspector specialist for a defense 
contractor since 2012. She left work on unpaid leave six weeks in 2010 while mourning 
the loss of her parents. She received her General Education Degree (GED) in 2002 and 
is currently married since 1995. She was previously married in 1984 and divorced in 
1990. She has two children. She has never held a security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s actions with respect to the SOR allegations and the current status are 
noted below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Bank judgment (2011) 
for $2,671 
Denied. Claimed settled 
and paid in 2013. No 
evidence of payment. 2015 
Credit Bureau Report (CBR) 
shows judgment 
unsatisfied. 
Not resolved 
1.b Medical debt for $935 Admitted. No evidence of 
payment presented. 
Not resolved 
1.c Medical debt for $47 Denied. No evidence of 
payment presented. 
Not resolved 
 
3 
 
1.d Camper loan debt for 
$9,312 
Admitted. Camper financed 
in 2006 and repossessed in 
2011. Delinquency 
remaining is amount owed. 
Not resolved 
1.e Boat loan debt for 
$33,724 
Admitted. Boat financed in 
2007 and repossessed. 
Delinquency remaining is 
amount owed. 
Not resolved 
1.f Motorcycle loan debt for 
$4,662 
Admitted. Motorcycle 
financed in 2005 and 
repossessed in 2011. 
Delinquency remaining is 
amount owed. 
Not resolved 
1.g Credit card debt for 
$9,174 
Denied. Used to pay 
general and husband’s 
business expenses. 
Delinquent in 2010. Claims 
debt discharged by creditor. 
No evidence of resolution or 
discharge provided. 
Not resolved 
 
 Applicant became financially unstable when she took six weeks of unpaid leave 
in 2010. She sought credit consolidation of her unsecured debt in 2010, and began 
making $600/month payments. Near the end of 2010, she was advised by the debt 
consolidation service to file bankruptcy because of the amount of secured debt she 
could not consolidate. She considered bankruptcy, but decided against it. In 2013, she 
inherited a large sum of money after her father’s property was sold, which she claims 
she used to pay off all unsecured debt. No documentary evidence of payments, 
settlements, debt forgiveness, or other resolution of the SOR debts has been provided. 
She reported in 2014 that she was the sole financial provider in the family. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.3 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debts in or about 2010 or 2011 that remain 
unresolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant allowed her debts to remain unresolved for many years before they 
became a security concern. Although she voluntarily used a period of unpaid leave after 
the loss of her parents, she failed to maintain her financial obligations, resulting in three 
repossessions with significant delinquencies owed. She has been steadily employed 
since 2012, but has not shown efforts to resolve the SOR delinquencies. The financial 
issues have been long-standing and remain recent and ongoing. There is no evidence 
of financial counseling, but she did briefly use a credit consolidation company. The 
extent of those efforts is unknown as she did not provide evidence of the consolidation 
plan, nor did she show the extent of payments made under the plan. Despite her claims 
to have resolved some debts, no documentary evidence was provided. Her overall 
financial responsibility and willingness to comply with rules and regulations remains a 
concern, and her financial condition casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Her efforts have been inadequate to demonstrate 
that her financial circumstances are under control or that she is willing and able to meet 
her past financial obligations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Overall, the record leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.k:   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
