 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-06112 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges ten delinquent debts totaling 
$5,234, and five charged-off accounts without balances. Applicant is credited with 
paying or resolving all of his SOR debts, except for two accounts which are in payment 
plans that are satisfactory to the creditor. Applicant has established a track record of 
debt payment and resolution. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
Access to classified information is granted.     
  
History of the Case 
  
On August 12, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On January 17, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
 
2 
                                         
 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
On February 18, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. On June 30, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 1, 
2016, the case was assigned to me. On August 18, 2016, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
September 19, 2016. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
Department Counsel offered seven exhibits; Applicant offered 40 pages of 
documentation about his debts; and all exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. (Transcript (Tr.) 11-17; Government Exhibit (GE) 1-7; Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 
A at 1-40) On September 27, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the 
hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.l, and he denied the remaining allegations. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 6) He is 
employed full time in security, and he has a separate part-time job assisting a federal 
agency with administrative tasks. (Tr. 6-8) In 1991, he graduated from high school, and 
he has not attended college. (Tr. 6) He has not served in the military. (Tr. 7) He has 
been employed in security for three years. (Tr. 8) He married in 1999, and he does not 
have any children. (Tr. 8) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The cause of Applicant’s delinquent debts was inability to work after an accident 
and two lengthy periods of unemployment. In 2010, Applicant was in a serious car 
accident, and in 2011, he received $15,000 from insurance. (Tr. 17, 20) From January 
through September 2012, and from January through May 2013, he was unemployed. 
(Tr. 17, 20, GE 1) When he was unemployed, he fell behind on several debts. (Tr. 36-
37) After he became employed, he established payment plans and paid or resolved his 
delinquent debts. (Tr. 36-37) 
 
The status of the 15 SOR allegations is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a bank debt for $2,821. On February 17, 2016, Applicant 
arranged a $125 monthly payment plan to resolve this debt. (Tr. 21-23; AE A at 27) He 
has made his monthly payments in compliance with this agreement. (Tr. 23) 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.o originate from or through the same 
large bank. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a collection account for $775 on behalf of this bank. On 
 
3 
                                         
 
April 24, 2015, the attorney representing the collection agent in SOR ¶ 1.b wrote that a 
judgment on behalf of the collection agent was satisfied. (AE A at 32-33) On February 
18, 2016, a collection agent for the creditor bank in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l wrote that the 
final payment of a debt for $1,833 was received, and the amount due was zero. (Tr. 29-
30; AE A at 26, 35) SOR ¶ 1.o alleges a charged-off debt from a store for an unknown 
amount. On February 18, 2016, the collection agent for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o wrote that 
the debt was paid. (Tr. 35; AE A at 34) The letter from the creditor indicates the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.o was first sold to the bank in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l, and then was being 
collected by the company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Tr. 30-31; AE A at 24, 26, 34) On 
January 25, 2016, Applicant originated a $55 monthly payment plan for a bank debt with 
a balance of $610, and his current balance is $280. (Tr. 24-25; AE A at 40) In sum, 
Applicant is credited with paying three of the four SOR debts, and one bank debt for 
$280 is in an established payment plan. (Tr. 30-31) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off debt owed to a business. On June 21, 2016, the 
creditor wrote that the debt was “settled in full.” (Tr. 25-26; AE A at 28) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a charged-off debt for $307. This debt was satisfied on an 
unspecified date. (GE 5 at 2-4) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.j allege delinquent medical debts for $227, $148, and $68. 
On February 15, 2016, Applicant paid $227 to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.e, and this debt is 
resolved. (Tr. 27; AE A at 38) On February 18, 2016, he paid $148 to the creditor in 
SOR ¶ 1.f, and this debt is resolved. (Tr. 26; GE 5 at 2-4; AE A at 1) On February 20, 
2016, he paid $68 to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.j, and this debt is resolved. (Tr. 26; AE A at 
31; GE 5 at 2-4; AE A at 39)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a collection debt for $147, which originated from a 
telecommunications company. On February 11, 2016, Applicant paid this debt, and he 
has a zero balance owed on this account. (Tr. 26; AE A at 31; GE 5 at 2-4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a charged-off bank debt for $143. On February 24, 2016, 
Applicant paid this debt. (Tr. 28; AE A at 25)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a collection debt for $98. Applicant paid the debt in full using a 
credit card account. (Tr. 26; AE A at 31; GE 5 at 2-4; AE A at 29)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.m alleges a charged-off debt owed to a bank for an unknown amount. In 
September 2014, Applicant paid a collection account for $1,780, which originated from 
the bank in SOR ¶ 1.m. (Tr. 31-33; AE A at 30) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n alleges a charged-off debt owed to a store for an unknown amount.  
The collection agent for the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.n claimed Applicant’s spouse owed a 
debt for $1,957 (AE A at 5, 23), and in 2014, the collection agent filed a lawsuit against 
Applicant’s spouse to collect the debt. (AE A) On September 11, 2014, the collection 
agent informed Applicant’s spouse that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n was satisfied. (Tr. 34-35; 
AE B at 22)  
 
4 
                                         
 
In sum, the only SOR debts not paid or resolved are the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b, and those two debts are in established payment plans. (Tr. 41-42) Applicant is 
current on all of his bills and expenses, including his mortgage and his car payment. (Tr. 
35-38) He maintained contact with his creditors when he was unable to make payments. 
(Tr. 38) Applicant understands the security concern raised by delinquent debts, and he 
assures he will continue to maintain his financial responsibility. (Tr. 41, 44) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
                                         
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
                                         
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s delinquent debts were caused 
by his inability to work after an accident and two lengthy periods of unemployment.  
When he was unemployed, he fell behind on several debts. After he became employed, 
he established payment plans and paid his delinquent debts. He acted responsibly by 
paying several debts subsequently alleged on the SOR before the SOR was issued.  
 
                                            
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges ten delinquent accounts totaling $5,234, and five 
charged-off accounts without balances. Applicant is credited with paying all of his SOR 
debts, except for two accounts which are in payment plans that are satisfactory to the 
creditors. Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to pay his debts and his 
track record of paying his debts, future new delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.” His payments of his debts showed good faith. He has sufficient income 
to keep his debts in current status and to continue making progress paying his 
remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will conscientiously endeavor to maintain 
his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is employed full 
time in security, and he has a separate part-time job assisting a federal agency with 
administrative tasks. He has been employed in security for three years, and he has 
made steady financial progress after becoming employed to resolve his debts. He is 
sufficiently mature to conscientiously comply with his security responsibilities.    
 
Appellant’s delinquent debts were caused by inability to work after a serious 
traffic accident and periods of unemployment. After he became fully employed, he 
resumed debt payments. All of Applicant’s SOR debts are now paid or are in current 
payment plans. He is communicating with his creditors and assures he intends to pay 
his debts. He understands the conduct required to retain his security clearance. The 
 
8 
                                         
 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating: 
  
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
