 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02551 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 19, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
June 13, 2016, scheduling the hearing for July 21, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR by 
withdrawing SOR ¶ 1.d was granted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 
28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2003. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1986 
until he was honorably discharged in 1991. He seeks to retain a security clearance, 
which he has held since at least 2004. He has two associate’s degree that were 
awarded in 2006 and 2010 and a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 2010. He is 
married for the second time. He has three children, ages 24, 11, and 9.1 
 
Applicant’s wife left her job in about 2009 and became a stay-at-home mother 
until she reentered the workforce in 2011. Applicant was out of work for about 10 weeks 
in 2012 when his company’s employees went on strike. He was unable to pay all his 
bills, a number of debts became delinquent, and his car was repossessed.2 
 
The amended SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted owing all the 
debts with the exception of two unidentified medical debts totaling about $228 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.f and 1.h) and $9,987 owed on the balance due on an auto loan after the car was 
repossessed in about 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.m). Applicant admitted that he fell behind on his 
car loan, but he stated that he caught up on his payments and the creditor cashed his 
check right before the car was repossessed. He is bitter about the experience and 
refuses to pay anything to the creditor. The debt is listed on multiple credit reports.3 
 
The SOR alleges three student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.i, and 1.l). However, it 
appears the loans have been transferred and consolidated. The most recent credit 
report lists one defaulted student loan owed to the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a with a 
balance of $32,021. Applicant admitted that he had not paid his student loans since 
about 2010, and he estimated the balance due as about $30,000.4 
 
Applicant is only an authorized user of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j and not 
personally responsible for the debt. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($2,782) and 1.k 
($2,781) are duplicate accounts. The credit reports list two accounts to the creditor 
identified in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant is only an authorized user of one of the accounts. The 
SOR does not allege the authorized-user account. The remaining five miscellaneous 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.n, and 1.o) total $2,128.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17-18, 43; GE 1, 5. 
 
2 Tr. at 14, 18-23; GE 1, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 37-40; GE 1-5; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C, D. 
 
4 Tr. at 30-35; GE 2-4; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C, D. 
 
5 Tr. at 29-31; GE 2-4; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C, D. 
 
3 
 
Applicant and his wife were able to bring their mortgage loan current before they 
sold the house for a profit. He and his wife settled a judgment that was solely in her 
name for about $4,500. He may have paid other debts that were not alleged in the SOR, 
but he has not paid any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He still has about $55,000 that 
he received from the sale of their house. He retained a company in November 2015 to 
assist him in repairing and restoring his credit. The company advised him not to pay his 
debts until his finances are sorted out. He plans to buy another house and intends to 
use at least some of the $55,000 as a down payment. He and his wife went on a cruise 
in 2015. Applicant testified that he thought he was doing the right thing by working to 
have his debts removed from his credit report, but he realized he needs to do more and 
he plans to pay his debts.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 14-16, 20-21, 24-27, 35-37, 40-44; GE 2-4; AE A-D. 
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.i, and 1.l are duplicates. SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.k are also duplicates. 
When the same conduct is alleged more than once in the SOR under the same 
guideline, the duplicate allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶¶ 
1.i, 1.l, and 1.k are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant is only an authorized user of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j and not 
personally responsible for the debt. SOR ¶ 1.j is concluded for Applicant. The 
unidentified medical debts do not raise a security concern. SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s wife left her job in about 2009 and became a stay-at-home mother 
until she reentered the workforce in 2011. Applicant was out of work for about 10 weeks 
in 2012 when his company’s employees went on strike. Since that time, he brought his 
mortgage loan current and he settled a judgment in his wife’s name for $4,500. He may 
have paid other debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He retained a company in 
November 2015 to assist him in repairing and restoring his credit. He still has about 
$55,000 that he received from the sale of their house, but he has not paid any of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. He has not paid his student loans since 2010, and he owes 
more than $30,000. He stated that he plans to pay his debts. The Appeal Board has 
held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record 
of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 
2009)).  
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), and 20(e) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) has 
minimal applicability. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) (financial counseling) is applicable; the 
second part (clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) is 
not applicable. I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his stable work history. 
However, he has unresolved financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
