 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03594 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was 
received on March 7, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
 
2 
 
 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days from receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and provided a response 
to the FORM that is marked as Applicant Exhibit A. He indicated his intent to provide 
additional documents, but did not. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me 
on September 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He graduated from college in 2005 earning a 
bachelor’s degree. He married in 2009 and has two children, ages, six and four. He has 
worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since 2012. He has been steadily 
employed since November 2005, except for three months prior to starting his current 
job.1  
 
 Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that when he was younger he was not 
taught how to manage his personal finances. He acquired debts that he was unable to 
pay. He has now learned how to properly manage his personal finances and pay his 
debts timely. He explained he purchased a car in 2014 and made a down payment of 
50% and has made his scheduled payments. He does not have any credit cards and 
has a “healthy positive cash balance in his checking account to pay his monthly bills 
and plan for unexpected expenses.”2 He also stated that he started his own side-
business in May 2014. The year-to-date revenue is over $470,000 and the profit is in 
excess of $132,000. He is saving money to put a down payment on a house.  
 
 Applicant further stated that he is currently paying off his bad debts and has no 
plans to take on additional debts, other than a home. He said: “I am making a significant 
salary now, in addition to the profit of my business, which also has zero debt.”3 He 
believes he is not a risk to national security due to his finances.  
 
 In September 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
In November 2014, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator and was 
confronted with the debts alleged in the SOR. At the time, he did not indicate his 
intentions regarding resolving the delinquent accounts. These debts are supported by 
credit reports from October 2014 and October 2015.4 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Answer to SOR. 
 
3 Answer to SOR.  
 
4 Items 3, 4, 5, 6.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated that the medical debt from 2011 
in SOR ¶ 1.a ($185) was paid, and he would provide a receipt.5 He did not.  
 
 Applicant stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($6,295) was a credit card debt from 
2006. He stated he contacted the creditor to arrange a payment plan. He did not provide 
proof that he has a plan or made any payments.6  
 
 Applicant stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($493) is a credit card debt from 2011. He 
stated he paid this debt in full, but did not provide supporting evidence.7  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($12,481) 
was for the purchase of a vehicle in 2007. The car was repossessed. Applicant stated 
he arranged a 72-month-payment plan to satisfy the debt. He indicated he has been 
making payments, but he did not provide evidence to document the plan or any 
payments made.8  
  
 Applicant stated in his response to the FORM that he now earns considerably 
more money, lowered his lifestyle, and lives within his means. He completed a financial 
counseling course, has a budget, and his savings account is growing.9 
.  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
5 AE A. 
 
6 Item 4; AE A. 
 
7 Item 4; AE A. 
 
8 Item 4; AE A. 
 
9 AE A. Applicant indicated in his response to the FORM that he would provide proof that he was 
resolving debts within 15 days from when he submitted his response to the SOR. I contacted Department 
Counsel to determine if any additional evidence was provided and was told none was received.  
 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has four delinquent debts totaling more than $19,400 that remain 
unpaid and unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He attributed his 
early financial problems to being young and not being taught how to manage his 
personal finances. Applicant has been steadily employed since 2006. He provided 
information that he is now making considerable more money, his savings account is 
growing, and his part-time business has a profit of $132,000. Applicant has not provided 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
proof that he has paid his delinquent debts. No evidence was provided to indicate his 
delinquent debts were beyond his control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant indicated he has a budget, but did not provide it or disclose if 
repayment of his delinquent debts was included in it. He stated he has taken a financial 
counseling course. He did not provide evidence that there are clear indications that his 
financial problems and delinquent debts are being resolved or are under control. Only 
the first part of AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant did not provide evidence of a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He indicated in both his answer to the SOR and his 
response to the FORM that his financial situation has improved. His earnings have 
increased and he has a successful part-time business with a substantial profit. Applicant 
has been aware since at least 2014, when he completed his SCA and was interviewed 
by a government investigator, that his finances are a security concern. He has not 
provided evidence that he was actively addressing his delinquent debt after his finances 
improved. He did not provide any documentary evidence to show what action he has 
taken to resolve his delinquent debts. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
