  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-02930
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred delinquent or past-due debts through circumstances that are
unlikely to recur. Although she still has unpaid debts, she has acted responsibly in
resolving those debts she was able to pay, and she is managing her current finances in
a prudent manner. The security concerns about Applicant’s finances are mitigated and
her request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On June 29, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
her employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a
security clearance.  1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 At Department Counsel’s request, I have included, as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1, a copy of the March 8, 20163
letter that forwarded Gx. 1 - 4 to Applicant, in accordance with Directive Section E3.1.13. Also included, as
Hx. 2, is a list identifying those exhibits.
 Ax. D is a record of monthly payments for the debt alleged at SOR 1.c.4
 Ax. E is a copy of a monthly budget Applicant developed with the help of a financial counselor.5
2
On January 4, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for financial2
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to an administrative judge on March 28,
2016. The case was transferred to me on May 18, 2016, and I convened a hearing on
June 29, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel presented
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5.  Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits3
(Ax.) A - C. I held the record open after the hearing to receive additional relevant
information from Applicant. Her timely post-hearing submissions are admitted, without
objection, as Ax. D  and E.  The record closed on July 6, 2016, and a transcript of the4 5
hearing (Tr.) was received on July 13, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $15,130 for
eight delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.h). In response, Applicant  admitted,
with explanations, all of the SOR allegations (Answer). The SOR allegations are
supported by Gx. 1- 5, and by Applicant’s admissions. In addition to the facts thus
established, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 36 years old and works for a defense contractor in a job for which
she was hired in State A in April 2004. She is single, and has one child, now age 10.
She and the child’s father live together. (Gx. 1; Tr. 42 - 43)
From June 2000 until February 2004, Applicant worked in a county courthouse in
State B, where she originally is from. In February 2004, she followed her boyfriend, her
child’s father, to State A, where he originally is from. After two months, Applicant found
work with her current employer. Her boyfriend also was gainfully employed for the next
three years before being laid off. The $8,015 debt alleged at SOR 1.b is a delinquent
motorcycle loan Applicant co-signed for her boyfriend. He defaulted on the loan after
losing his job in 2007. The 2007, 2012, and 2015 credit reports admitted as Gx. 2, Gx.
3, and Gx. 4, respectively, list the motorcycle loan with the manufacturer and creditor
listed in SOR 1.b. They also list a second motorcycle loan from a different manufacturer
and creditor. Neither loan is listed in the 2016 credit report at Gx. 5. Applicant testified
she only co-signed one motorcycle loan and that she thought she and her boyfriend had
satisfied the debt. But she did not corroborate her claim with any documentation. Her
boyfriend has not taken any action regarding the debt at SOR 1.b, which remains
unresolved. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 5; Ax. A; Tr. 24, 25 - 27, 29 - 31, 37, 47 - 53)
The debt alleged at SOR 1.a is for acupuncture treatment Applicant obtained for
her back beginning in 2012. Her insurance covered some of the costs. Applicant agrees
she owes a debt, but she disagrees with the amount listed in her credit reports.
 See Directive, 6.3.6
3
Applicant did not provide any documents to support her claims regarding the amount of
this debt. She was unaware of this debt until November 2015 and has been trying to
negotiate a repayment plan ever since. In exchange for reducing the overall debt, the
creditor is demanding payments Applicant cannot afford. This debt remains unresolved.
(Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Ax. A; Tr. 28 - 29, 36 - 37)
Applicant is repaying the unpaid medical account debt alleged at SOR 1.c. She
and the creditor agreed that she would pay $200 each month to satisfy a lower amount
than actually owed. (Answer; Gx. 3; Ax. A; Ax. D; Tr. 25, 32) 
As to the remaining debts, Applicant established that the debt at SOR 1.h is a
duplicate of the debt alleged at SOR 1.g. She also presented information showing she
has paid the debts at SOR 1.d - 1.g. (Answer; Ax. A; Ax. C; Tr. 22 - 23, 32 - 36, 56)
Applicant recently started consulting with a financial counselor for advice on
resolving the rest of her debts. She also is trying to improve her money management
skills and has established a sound monthly budget. Available information shows
Applicant has nearly $700 remaining each month after debt payments and expenses.
Her boyfriend also contributes to the household finances and supports their child. He
has been gainfully employed for over a year. Applicant lives modestly and within her
means; she files and pays her taxes as required; and she has not incurred any new
unpaid debts. (Ax. E; Tr. 41 - 46, 50 - 55)
Applicant has a solid reputation among her friends and co-workers based on their
association with her over the past five to twelve years. They regard her as honest, hard
working, and reliable. (Ax. B)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).9
4
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a8
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant incurred significant unpaid debt through a combination of poor decision
making and lack of attention to her finances. Some of her debts were also the result of
incomplete medical insurance coverage. The debts at SOR 1.a and 1.b, which comprise
most of the total debt at issue, remain unresolved. Available information requires
application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s personal and professional circumstances have improved since she
incurred the debts reflected in the Government’s information. Her boyfriend is again
employed and contributes to the household finances. Further, Applicant has improved
the way her finances are managed, and she acted in good faith to resolve as many of
her debts as she could. Although still in its nascent stages, Applicant has sought
professional financial help as she tries to establish a monthly budget and continues to
pay her past-due debts. Applicant’s response to her financial problems supports a
conclusion she is responsible and has good judgment. I conclude from all of the
foregoing that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant responsibly has addressed her debts to the extent she is able.
She continues to negotiate with her remaining creditors and is hopeful of establishing
repayment plans agreeable to all concerned. Among her friends and work associates,
she has a good reputation for honesty and reliability. Her financial problems do not
reflect adversely on her judgment and trustworthiness. A fair and commonsense
assessment of the record evidence as a whole supports a conclusion that the security
concerns about Applicant’s finances have been mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
