 
1 
 
`                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03792 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the foreign preference security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 10, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
 
2 
 
20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 20, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 28, 2016. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that 
were marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Colombia. The request was not admitted in evidence but was included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in HE I over Applicant’s objection. Of note is that Colombia is one of the 
oldest democracies in Latin America. The United States is Colombia’s largest trading 
partner. Colombia has been plagued by transnational criminal and narcotics trafficking 
organizations, terrorist organizations, and armed criminal gangs. Colombia also 
continues to have human rights problems. Any person born in Colombia may be 
considered a Colombian citizen, and dual U.S.-Colombian citizens are required to 
present a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since about 2006. He seeks to retain a security 
clearance, which he has held for about 20 years. He has a bachelor’s degree that was 
awarded in 2003. He married in 1988 and divorced in 2011. He married his current wife 
in 2012. He has two adult children.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Colombia to Colombian parents. His mother came to the 
United States when Applicant was about 12 years old. She brought Applicant and his 
brother to the United States when Applicant was about 16 years old. Applicant became 
a U.S. citizen in 1993. His brother and mother also apparently became U.S. citizens, 
although at his hearing Applicant stated that he was unsure if his mother was a U.S. 
citizen or a permanent resident. She retained her Colombian citizenship. She now 
spends about eight to nine months of the year in Colombia.2 
 
 Applicant’s children are native-born U.S. citizens. His wife is a Colombian citizen 
living in the United States as a permanent resident. Applicant’s in-laws and extended 
family members are citizens and residents of Colombia. There is no indication that any 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17-21, 29, 32-34; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 30, 38-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
of Applicant’s family members have ties to the Colombian government, narcotics 
trafficking, or criminal gangs.3 
 
 Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Colombia. He obtained a U.S. 
passport after he became a U.S. citizen. Before 2006, he used his U.S. passport for 
foreign travel, including visits to Colombia. He stated that he was treated rudely by the 
Colombian border and customs officials and asked why he was not using a Colombian 
passport. He stated they told him that the next time he attempted to enter the country, 
he would be turned away if he did not have a Colombian passport. They told him his 
only other option was to renounce his Colombian citizenship.4 
 
 Applicant obtained a Colombian passport in March 2006. He informed his 
company’s facility security officer (FSO) that he had the passport. He stated that the 
FSO told him that he could not have a foreign passport while holding a security 
clearance. He gave the Colombian passport to the FSO. Applicant was told that if he 
needed the passport for travel purposes, he could retrieve the passport after providing 
the FSO with his itinerary and the reason he needed the passport.5 
 
 Applicant retrieved his Colombian passport from the FSO in 2012 and used it to 
travel to Colombia to marry his wife. Applicant stated that he had no problems with 
Colombian officials, but he was detained by U.S. immigration officials for several hours 
upon his return to the United States. Applicant believed he was detained because he 
held a security clearance. He stated that he “did not appreciate this treatment and it 
strongly made [him] consider no longer wanting to have a security clearance.”6 
 
 Applicant did not return his Colombian passport to his FSO when he returned 
from his 2012 Colombian trip. He stated that his FSO told him that the requirement for 
them to hold the passport had changed and that it was enough that the company knew 
he had a passport and that he had possession of it. He was also reminded that he had 
to inform the FSO of all foreign travel and if he used the Colombian passport. He wrote 
in May 2013 that “in order to continue to hold a security clearance, if it was required of 
[him], [he] would be willing to surrender [his] Colombian passport to the appropriate 
authorities without expectation that it be returned to [him].” He further wrote that “if it is 
[a] requirement for continuing to hold [his] security clearance, [he] would be willing to 
renounce his citizenship with Colombia.”7 
 
 Since his 2012 marriage, Applicant has traveled to Colombia about once a year 
using his Colombian passport, most recently about a month before the hearing. He 
renewed the passport in March 2015, and it will not expire until March 2025. He has a 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 33, 41-45, 51, 63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 24, 26-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 22-23, 32, 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 23-24, 36; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
small house and several lots in Colombia, which he valued at about $21,000. He has 
two properties in the United States. With his children in the United States, he indicated 
that it was unlikely that he would retire in Colombia, but he did not rule out the possibility 
because of the cost of living. He reiterated at his hearing that he would be willing to 
renounce his Colombian citizenship if that is required for him to have a security 
clearance. He stated that his company would not hold his passport.8 
 
 Applicant “surrendered” his Colombian passport to his FSO on June 21, 2016. 
The FSO noted that DOHA will immediately be notified if Applicant retrieves the 
passport.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 25, 27, 31-38, 46-48, 51-52. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to:  
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant obtained and possessed a Colombian passport while a U.S. citizen. AG 
¶ 10(a) is applicable. The renewal of the Colombian passport while a U.S. citizen could 
raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his Colombian 
citizenship.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant exercised his Colombian citizenship by obtaining a Colombian passport 
while a U.S. citizen. Therefore, his dual citizenship is not based solely on his parents’ 
citizenship or birth in a foreign country. AG ¶ 11(a) is not applicable. Applicant 
“surrendered” his Colombian passport to his FSO in 2006. He retrieved it in 2012 to 
travel to Colombia and marry his wife. He did not return it to the FSO, and used it to 
annually travel to Colombia. He once again surrendered the passport to his FSO the 
day after the hearing.  
 
Applicant stated that he is willing to renounce his Colombian citizenship if that is 
required for him to have a security clearance. However, he was informed in about 2006 
by Colombian border and customs officials that he would not be required to have a 
Colombian passport to enter the country if he renounced his Colombian citizenship. He 
has taken no action to do so. There is every indication that he will use his FSO to hold 
his Colombian passport until he takes his next annual trip to Colombia. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 
11(e) have some applicability, but they are not enough to mitigate all the foreign 
preference concerns created by Applicant’s dual citizenship and what is expected to be 
ongoing use of a Colombian passport.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
7 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s wife, in-laws, and mother are Colombian citizens. It is unclear 
whether his mother is a dual U.S.-Colombian citizen or a U.S. permanent resident. His 
in-laws are Colombian residents and his mother spends about eight to nine months of 
the year in Colombia. Colombia has been plagued by transnational criminal and 
narcotics trafficking organizations, terrorist organizations, and armed criminal gangs. 
Colombia also continues to have human rights problems. Applicant’s foreign contacts 
create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his wife. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Colombia. Colombia has significant 
problems, but it is also one of the oldest democracies in Latin America, and the United 
States is Colombia’s largest trading partner. I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United States and 
the interests of the Colombian government, a terrorist group, a criminal organization, or 
a drug cartel. AG ¶ 8(a) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s ties to Colombia as well as his relationships in the 
United States. Applicant has possessed and annually used a Colombian passport since 
2012. He surrendered it to his FSO the day after the hearing. While he expressed a 
willingness to renounce his Colombian citizenship if that is required for him to have a 
security clearance, he has taken no action to do so. It appears that he will use the FSO 
to hold his Colombian passport until he retrieves it to take his annual trip to Colombia.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns, but he did not mitigate the foreign 
preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
