 
 
 
 
1 
          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 15-06779 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and drug involvement security 
clearance concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on April 20, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense 
 
 
 
 
2 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to another administrative 
judge. It reassigned the case to me on July 18, 2016, and issued a Notice of Hearing 
that same day. The case was set for August 17, 2016, and heard as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 4 into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
August 24, 2016. The record remained open until September 14, 2016, in order to 
provide Applicant time to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE 5 
through 8, which were admitted into the record without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. He admitted the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. (AR.) His admission is incorporated herein. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and married since 2004. They have a five-year-old 
child. His wife works for a retail store. He completed a master’s degree in 2015. He 
works for a defense contractor. Previously, he has been self-employed at times. He held 
a security clearance in 2006 when he worked for another defense contractor. He 
performs community service through his employer. (Tr. 15-19; GE 1.) 
 
 In 2006 Applicant co-signed a first and second mortgage with his father for the 
purchase of a property. (Tr. 21, 30.) This was the second time Applicant helped his 
father when he was having business problems. Applicant was not involved in the 
management of the property and did not make payments on the loans. Sometime later, 
the mortgage bank that made both loans contacted Applicant and told him that his 
father had stopped making monthly payments and that there was an unpaid balance. 
Applicant then asked his father to make the unpaid payments and sell the property. (Tr. 
21-25.) In January 2015 the property went into foreclosure. (GE 5.) In November 2015 a 
court entered a Consent Judgment for Foreclosure on the property that resolved all 
claims between the parties, which included both mortgages. (AE 1, AE 5.)  
 
 In response to questioning about whether the Consent Judgment resolved the 
second mortgage, Applicant testified that his attorney advised him that it did, and that 
he was not responsible for any deficiencies. Applicant did not receive an IRS Form 
1099C notifying him that he owed taxes on a cancelled debt. (Tr. 27-29.) Applicant said 
that he will not co-sign any legal documents with his father in the future. (Tr. 30, 39.) 
The two mortgages were alleged as having past due amounts in SOR ¶ 1.a ($18,660) 
and SOR ¶ 1.b ($80,355).  
 
 The SOR alleged a third unpaid debt in ¶ 1.c ($2,706). Applicant said this debt 
pertains to a storage locker he rented when he was in business in 2010. He said he 
subsequently terminated the lease on it and a bank took possession of it. According to 
an April 2015 credit report the debt was reported as delinquent in March 2015. (GE 5.) 
When confronted about the debt during a July 2015 interview, Applicant stated he was 
not responsible for the debt. (GE 3.) He testified that he was unaware of its delinquency 
 
 
 
 
3 
until he reviewed the 2015 credit report. He denied responsibility for the debt. (Tr. 31.) 
He subsequently asked the bank for proof that it was his debt. He filed a dispute with a 
credit bureau, but has not received a response. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have a budget. Their annual income is about $213,000. 
(Tr. 21.) He said all of his bills are current, including his mortgage. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 In response to questions in his April 2015 security clearance application (SCA), 
regarding illegal drug use, Applicant disclosed that the first time he used marijuana was 
in January 1992 and the most recent time was June 2014, when he went on a trip with 
friends from high school to celebrate a friend’s graduation. He stated that they went to a 
state where marijuana is legal. (Tr. 35; GE 1.) He stated in the SCA that “I don’t think 
that it was illegal, but I think that I should disclose it.” (GE 1.) During his July 2015 
interview, Applicant said he occasionally, maybe once or twice a year, smoked 
marijuana over the years. He said he never purchased or sold it. He said he does not 
intend to use it again because he wants to be a responsible parent, and does not 
associate with friends who use marijuana. (GE 1, GE 3.)  
 
 Applicant testified that after his daughter was born in 2010 his use of marijuana 
decreased. His wife does not use it. He said the last time he used marijuana was in 
June 2014. He does not have marijuana in his home. He said he did not use marijuana 
while holding a security clearance. He seldom sees his high school friends, although 
some are friends of his family. He had a random drug screening before he was hired in 
2014 by his employer. He is aware of the company’s prohibition policy regarding illegal 
drug use. (Tr. 33-38.) In his SCA  he wrote that “I have no plans to use this substance in 
the future because it is not part of my life style and it simply is not worth the risk with my 
current employment and the prospect of losing my job and/or security clearance.” (GE 
1.)  
 
 Applicant stated that his performance evaluations ratings since starting with his 
employer have noted that he has exceeded expectations. (Tr. 19; AE 7) He received a 
20 percent increase in his salary and was promoted to management where he 
supervises 18 people. (Tr. 19.) His manager stated in a letter of recommendation that 
he has no reason to question Applicant’s judgment or integrity. He recommends 
Applicant for a security clearance. (AE 8.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
 
 
 
4 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
 
 
5 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes a disqualifying condition that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
The two mortgages, which Applicant helped his father obtain, became delinquent 
in January 2015 and were foreclosed in November 2015. A debt that Applicant assumed 
in 2010 became delinquent in April 2015. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying condition. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of that disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns raised under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant co-signed a first and second mortgage for his father on a piece of 
property that subsequently went into foreclosure because his father stopped making the 
monthly payments. These circumstances are unlikely to recur because Applicant does 
not intend to enter into legal contracts with his father in the future. This situation does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence 
                                            
1
 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
 
 
 
6 
establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant did not provide evidence that he 
participated in credit, financial, or budgetary counseling. However, he submitted 
evidence that the delinquent loans are resolved. Mitigation is established under AG ¶ 
20(c). He said he is disputing the $2,700 debt with a credit bureau, but did not provide 
evidence that it is resolved. Minimal mitigation is established under AG ¶ 20(e).   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; and 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition). 
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2014 SCA that on occasion he illegally used marijuana 
from 1992 until June 2014.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.”2 In 2015 SCA Applicant disclosed that he 
occasionally used marijuana over a period of years. He denied using it while previously 
holding a security clearance. He has not used marijuana since June 2014, over two 
years ago. Based on his honest disclosure, the circumstances surrounding his June 
2014 use of marijuana, a recent promotion, and a commitment to being a responsible 
parent, similar conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) provides mitigation.  
 
Applicant seldom sees the people with whom he illegally used marijuana. His wife 
does not use marijuana. He has not used any illegal drugs for two years, and stated that 
he does not intend to use them in the future. The evidence establishes some mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 26 (b)(1), (3), and (4). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                            
2
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004.)  
 
 
 
 
8 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 41-year-old 
man, who wanted to help his father purchase a property. Unfortunately, his father was 
unable to financially manage the property and Applicant became legally responsible for 
the resulting debt. In November 2015 a court resolved the matters through a consent 
judgment. Applicant may be responsible for a $2,700 debt, which he will be able to 
resolve given his budget if his pending dispute is unsuccessful. His financial obligations 
are under control. When he completed his SCA in 2015, he honestly disclosed his past 
infrequent use of marijuana, which ceased two years ago. He expressed his intention 
not to use it again and is aware of the adverse consequences future drug abuse could 
have on his employment. The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations and drug involvement guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:        For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2. a:            For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
