 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00213 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 25, 2014. On 
August 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 14, 
2016, and the case was assigned to me on May 4, 2016. On May 12, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 8, 2016. Applicant was unable to attend the hearing due to overseas 
operational requirements. The hearing was continued, to be resumed on a date to be 
determined. On July 27, 2016, DOHA notified Applicant that the continuation of the 
hearing was scheduled for August 18, 2016. I reconvened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until September 2, 2016, to enable 
him to submit additional documentary evidence. He did not submit any additional 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the June 8 hearing session on June 16, 
2016 and the transcript of the August 18 hearing session on August 29, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.j 
and denied SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old electronic technician employed by defense contractors 
since October 2007. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps from October 1994 to 
February 2007, attained the rank of sergeant, and received an honorable discharge. He 
deployed in support of combat operations three times during his military service. (Tr. 28-
29.) He was involuntarily discharged in accordance with the Marine Corps tenure rules 
because he was passed over for promotion. (Tr. 58.) He worked as a correctional officer 
for about eight months before beginning his employment by a defense contractor. He 
attended a technical college from May 2008 to June 2010 and received an associate’s 
degree. He has held a security clearance since 1995. (Tr. 8, 29.) 
 
 Applicant married in October 2002 and divorced in February 2012. He married 
again in April 2013, separated in January 2014, and divorced in November 2015. (Tr. 
26.). He has two children from his first marriage, ages 13 and 9, for whom he voluntarily 
pays child support of $600 per month. His child support payments are current. (GX 2 at 
5; AX A.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in June 2014, he answered “no” to a question 
asking whether, in the last seven years, he had consulted with a health care 
professional regarding an emotional or mental health condition or had been hospitalized 
for such a condition. He did not disclose that, in February or March 2014, he sought 
counseling from a counselor and a medical doctor and received a prescription for 
depression, which he still takes. When he was interviewed by a security investigator in 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
July 2014, he stated that he did not disclose the counseling because he was 
embarrassed. (GX 1 at 31; GX 2 at 7.) At the hearing, he testified that he knew he 
should have answered “yes,” but he was afraid that it would affect his ability to continue 
his security clearance. (Tr. 55-57.) 
 
 Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in September 2007 and 
received a discharge in January 2008. The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He 
attributed his bankruptcy to his inability to find a well-paying job after his discharge from 
the Marine Corps, his child-support payments, and financial mismanagement. (GX 2 at 
8.) As a correctional officer from February to October 2007, his pay was about half of 
what he earned in the Marine Corps. (Tr. 34). His initial pay as an employee of a 
defense contractor was even less than his pay as a correctional officer, but he 
voluntarily left his job as a correctional officer because he found the job too stressful. 
(Tr. 34; GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his current financial problems began after he was divorced 
in February 2012. He was laid off from work for almost six months, and his 
unemployment compensation was about 60 percent of what he had been making.  
 
 In addition to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, the SOR alleges 
nine delinquent debts totaling about $19,000. The debts are reflected in his credit 
bureau reports (CBRs) from July 2014 (GX 3) and July 2015 (GX 4). The status of these 
debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: deficiency after auto repossession ($10,748). Applicant’s July 
2014 CBR reflects that this account was opened in June 2006 and referred for collection 
in October 2010. Applicant testified that he cosigned the loan to purchase a vehicle for 
his wife, with the understanding that she would make the payments. His wife failed to 
make the payments, and the vehicle was repossessed. Applicant has taken no action to 
resolve the debt. (Tr. 40-43.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: judgment filed in September 2012 for unpaid rent ($3,431). 
Applicant testified that he was unable to pay his rent because he was separated from 
his wife and laid off. In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, he stated that the 
judgment was satisfied by garnishment of his pay in 2014. (Tr. 43.) He testified that he 
had documentary evidence that the judgment was satisfied. (Tr. 43-45.) However, he 
submitted no such evidence.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: judgment filed in September 2012 for delinquent credit-card 
account ($864). Applicant admitted this debt in his answer to the SOR. He testified that 
he has taken no action to resolve it. (Tr. 45-46.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: judgment filed in January 2012 for unpaid rent ($889). Applicant 
testified that the judgment was satisfied by garnishment of his pay. His July 2014 CBR 
reflects that it satisfied in February 2012. (GX 3 at 4.) 
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: judgment for delinquent credit-card account filed in November 
2008 ($945); SOR ¶ 1.h: delinquent credit-card account placed for collection 
($204); SOR ¶ 1.i: medical bill placed for collection ($464); and SOR ¶ 1.j: medical 
bill placed for collection ($701). In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, 
Applicant stated that he paid these debts. (Tr. 46-49.) However, he provided no 
documentation of payment by the time the record closed.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: delinquent credit-card account placed for collection ($953). 
Applicant testified that he has taken no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant’s net income varies widely, depending on the amount of overtime. 
Between January to July 2016, he worked overtime in 10 of the 14 two-week pay 
periods, ranging from 16 to 74 hours. During 14 two-week pay periods from January to 
July 2016, his net pay ranged from a low of $32 (when he was docked $1,201 for 
unpaid leave) to $2,130 (when he worked 74 hours of overtime). (AX B.) He testified 
that he lives paycheck to paycheck. (Tr. 53.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
5 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant delinquent debts are 
numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. His income varies widely, and he has experienced periods of unemployment, but 
he has not acted responsibly. He satisfied one judgment for unpaid rent, but it was 
satisfied by an involuntary garnishment. He claimed that he paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.f, and 1.h-1.j, but he submitted no documentation of payment, even though he 
was given additional time to provide it. He admitted that he has taken no action to 
resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.g. He has not sought or received financial 
counseling. He has not disputed any of the debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” This disqualifying condition is established by Applicant’s admissions 
that he falsified his SCA because he was embarrassed and was afraid that a truthful 
answer would affect his application to continue his security clearance.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Neither of these mitigating conditions is established. Applicant made no effort to 
correct his falsification until he was confronted with the evidence by a security 
investigator. His falsification was not minor, because falsification of a security clearance 
application “strikes at the heart of the security clearance process.” ISCR Case No. 09-
01652 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) His falsification was arguably infrequent, but it did not 
happen under unique circumstances making it unlikely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his delinquent debts and falsification of his SCA. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
