 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04293 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: O. Isaac Falusi, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant immigrated with her parents to the United States from Nigeria when 
she was nine years old. In August 2016, she renounced her Nigerian citizenship and 
returned her Nigerian passport to the Nigerian Government. While she has frequent 
contacts with her sister and parents, who returned to Nigeria and are dual citizens and 
residents of Nigeria, she has significantly greater contacts with the United States than 
with Nigeria. She can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. 
interests. Foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2014, Applicant signed and submitted an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance 
application (SF 86) (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On December 30, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines C (foreign preference) and 
B (foreign influence). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD 
CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s access to classified information and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2)  
 
On February 10, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On April 6, 2016, Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed. On June 18, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On August 8, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the 
hearing for August 30, 2016. (Transcript (Tr.) 15-16) Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered four exhibits into evidence; Applicant offered 
one exhibit into evidence; and all exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 14-16; 
GE 1-4; AE A) On September 7, 2016, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria (hereinafter Nigeria). (Tr. 10-11; HE 4) Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents to show detail and context for these facts in the 
Administrative Notice request. Applicant did not object to me taking administrative 
notice of the facts in the administrative notice request. (Tr. 11; HE 4) See the Nigeria 
section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material facts from 
Department Counsel’s submissions on Nigeria. I have also taken administrative notice 
of facts from the U.S. Department of State website. See note 2, infra. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings, is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in her response to the SOR. (HE 3) Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
In 1989, Applicant was born in Nigeria. (Tr. 24; GE 1) She works for a large 
accounting firm as a consultant. (Tr. 26) In 1998, Applicant, who was nine years old at 
that time, and her parents immigrated to the United States from Nigeria. (Tr. 17) 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant attended grammar school, high school, and college in the United States. (Tr. 
27) In 2004, she became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 27; GE 1; GE 2) In 2010, she received a 
bachelor’s degree. (GE 1) She has never married, and she does not have any children. 
(Tr. 27, 47) Applicant lives with her brother in the United States. (Tr. 19) Applicant’s 
annual salary is $106,000. (Tr. 45) Her investments in the United States total about 
$250,000, which includes equity in her home. (Tr. 45-46) 
 
In about 2011, Applicant sister, who is a citizen of Nigeria, but not of the United 
States, returned to Nigeria. (Tr. 19, 28) In 2012, she married a Nigerian citizen, and she 
has two children. (Tr. 19) She works for a private company in Nigeria. (Tr. 35) Applicant 
communicates with her sister about once a month. (Tr. 37) 
 
Applicant’s parents are dual citizens of the United States and citizens of Nigeria, 
and in 2009, they retired from their U.S. employment and returned to Nigeria. (Tr. 19, 
27, 32) Her parents visit the United States twice a year. (Tr. 20, 34) Prior to retiring, her 
parents worked for a state government in the United States. (Tr. 20) Her parents have 
never worked for the Nigerian Government. (Tr. 21) Her parents do not live in an area of 
Nigeria where they are at significant risk for a terrorist attack. (Tr. 22, 42-44) Applicant 
communicates with her parents about four times a month. (Tr. 33)  
 
Applicant visited Nigeria in 2006, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 
January 2016. (Tr. 23, 38-40) She usually stayed in Nigeria for about 14-20 days. (Tr. 
23) She has not paid taxes to the Nigerian Government or received benefits from the 
Nigerian Government. (Tr. 29) She does not send funds to her parents, and she does 
not own property in Nigeria. (Tr. 34, 41)  
 
Foreign preference 
 
 On January 9, 2008, and November 15, 2013, Applicant renewed her Nigerian 
passport. (SOR ¶ 1.a response) She used her Nigerian passport to travel to Nigeria in 
2007, 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2016. (Tr. 39-40; SOR ¶ 1.a response) She 
used her Nigerian passport as a convenience because she did not need to get a visa. 
She did not use her Nigerian passport out of loyalty to, or a preference for, Nigeria. (Tr. 
30) In August 2016, Applicant renounced her Nigerian citizenship and returned her 
three Nigerian passports (two were expired) to the Government of Nigeria. (Tr. 29; AE 
A) She was not reluctant to renounce her Nigerian citizenship because she considers 
herself to be an American. (Tr. 23) 
 
Nigeria2 
 
Nigeria is a federal republic that gained independence from Britain in 1960.  
Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa with a population in 2011 of 160 million. 
                                            
2The facts in the section concerning Nigeria, except for the first three paragraphs, are quoted 
from Department Counsel’s administrative notice request. (HE 4) The first three paragraphs are from the 
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of African Affairs, Background Note: Nigeria, April 19, 2012, 
http://www.state.gov/outofdate/ bgn/nigeria/200317.htm. (HE 5) The second and third paragraphs are 
quoted verbatim from this 2012 Background Note. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The country’s area is about the same as California, Nevada, and Arizona combined. 
The United States is Nigeria’s largest trading partner. Oil imports from Nigeria to the 
United States account for 11% of U.S. oil imports. “Oil and gas exports account for more 
than 95% of export earnings and over 80% of federal government revenue.” Oil revenue 
“fueled massive migration to the cities and led to increasingly widespread poverty, 
especially in rural areas.” The United States is the largest foreign investor in Nigeria, 
and U.S. investment is mostly in mining and petroleum.    
 
Since the restoration of basic democracy in Nigeria in 1999, the bilateral 
relationship [between the United States and Nigeria] has continued to improve, and 
cooperation on many important foreign policy goals, such as regional peacekeeping, 
has been excellent. On April 6, 2010, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Nigerian 
Secretary to the Government of the Federation Yayale Ahmed inaugurated the U.S.-
Nigeria Binational Commission, a formalized commitment to hold bilateral talks on four 
key areas: good governance, transparency, and integrity; energy and investment; Niger 
Delta and regional security; and agriculture and food security.  
 
President Yar’Adua visited President George W. Bush at the White House on 
December 13, 2007. During her first official trip to Africa, Secretary Clinton visited 
Nigeria on August 12, 2009. President Jonathan met with President Barack Obama at 
the White House on June 8, 2011. An estimated one million Nigerians and Nigerian 
Americans live, study, and work in the United States, while over 25,000 Americans live 
and work in Nigeria.  
 
The country has faced intermittent political turmoil and economic crises since 
independence. Political life has been scarred by conflict along ethnic, geographic, and 
religious lines, and corruption and misrule have undermined the authority and legitimacy 
of the state. Congress regularly monitors Nigerian political developments and has 
expressed concerns with corruption, human rights abuses, and environmental damage 
in the Delta, as well as with the threat of violent extremism in Nigeria. 
 
Corruption in Nigeria is “massive, widespread, and pervasive,” according to the 
U.S. State Department, and by many accounts, the country’s development will be 
hampered until it can address the perception of impunity for corruption and fraud. 
Human Rights Watch suggests that Nigeria’s political system rewards rather than 
punishes corruption, which has been fueled by oil revenues for decades. 
 
The most serious human right problems during 2014 were those committed by 
the militant sect known by the name of Boko Haram, which conducted numerous 
attacks on government and civilian targets throughout the country, resulting in 
thousands of deaths and injuries, widespread destruction, forced internal displacement, 
and the flight of more than 100,000 refugees to neighboring countries. In its response to 
Boko Haram, and at times to crime in general, security services perpetrated extrajudicial 
killings and engaged in torture, rape, arbitrary detention, mistreatment of detainees, and 
destruction of property. The country also suffered from widespread societal violence, 
including ethnic, regional, and religious violence. Other serious human rights problems 
included vigilante killings and official corruption. The Civilian Joint Task Force (C-JFT) 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
continued to recruit children and commit extrajudicial killings. The government lacked 
effective mechanisms to investigate and punish abuse and corruption. Massive, 
widespread, and pervasive corruption affected all levels of government and security 
forces.  
 
Nigerian security forces, particularly the police, have been accused of serious 
human rights abuses. In 2007, a U.N. report indicated that torture is an intrinsic part of 
how law enforcement services operate within the country and called on the Nigerian 
Government to criminalize the practice. Nigerian officials have acknowledged some 
abuses; in 2010 the country’s police minister called the situation “condemnable and 
unacceptable,” but few security personnel have been prosecuted for abuses.  
 
*  *  * 
 
 Kidnappings remain a security concern throughout the country. Criminal 
elements throughout Nigeria orchestrate kidnappings for ransom; Islamic extremists, 
operating predominantly in the North, also have been known to conduct kidnappings. 
Criminals or militants have abducted foreign nationals, including U.S. citizens, from off-
shore and land-based oil facilities, residential compounds, airports, and public 
roadways. In 2015, six U.S. citizens were kidnapped in separate incidents.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
   
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport. 
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2004. She renewed her Nigerian passport 
after becoming a U.S. citizen, and she used it from 2006 to January 2016 to enter 
Nigeria. The disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies. 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns: “(b) the 
individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;” and “(e) the 
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated.” 
  
In August 2016, Applicant renounced her Nigerian citizenship and returned her 
Nigerian passports to the Government of Nigeria. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) apply, and 
foreign preference security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationship with her family 
living in Nigeria and her frequent travel to Nigeria from 2006 to January 2016.    
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). The mere possession of close 
family ties with relatives living in Nigeria is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if an applicant has such a relationship with even one person 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Nigeria with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her relationships 
with family members who are citizens of Nigeria or living in Nigeria do not pose a 
security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where she might be forced 
to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to protect her family 
members living in a foreign country from harm, pressure or coercion.3 With its negative 
human rights record, and high levels of crime in Nigeria (especially from terrorists) as 
well as other political, economic and military problems in this country, it is conceivable 
that anyone living in Nigeria might be targeted by governmental or non-governmental 
criminal elements in an attempt to gather information from the United States. 
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, or other entities from 
Nigeria seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, her family living in Nigeria, or anyone in the United States. Applicant’s 
communications and visits with family living in Nigeria are sufficiently frequent, to 
                                            
3 An applicant with relatives in Iran, for example, has a much heavier burden to overcome than an 
applicant with relatives living in Nigeria. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) 
(stating an applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when 
parents and siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(articulating “very heavy burden” standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran); ISCR 
Case No. 07-12471 at 9 (A.J. May 30, 2008) (listing numerous recent cases involving U.S. citizens with 
Iranian connections whose clearances were denied, and citing no recent cases where the Appeal Board 
affirmed the grant of a clearance for someone with immediate family members living in Iran). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
demonstrate affection for family living in Nigeria. Concern for family is a positive 
character trait that increases trustworthiness; however, it also increases concern about 
potential foreign influence. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence and 
raised the issue of foreign influence. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶ 8(b) applies to mitigate concerns relating to Applicant’s family living in 
Nigeria. Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” 
She has family connections to the United States. She lives with her brother in the United 
States. Applicant has lived in the United States for most of her life.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by relationships with family living in Nigeria. It is 
important to be mindful of the United States’ positive relationship with Nigeria, especially 
the history of military and diplomatic connections between Nigeria and the United 
States. The United States and Nigeria share a mutual goal of suppressing terrorism.      
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies in part. Applicant is currently employed by a U.S. Government 
contractor with an annual income of $106,000. The value of her U.S. assets is about 
$250,000. Her property interests in the United States include her employment and 
investments in the United States. Her significant U.S. financial connection weighs 
towards mitigation of security concerns.     
 
In sum, the primary foreign influence security concern is Applicant’s close 
relationships with her family living in Nigeria. Applicant has “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Her residency in the United States since the age 
of nine and education in the United States clearly outweigh her connections to Nigeria. 
She “can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
Foreign influence concerns are mitigated under AG ¶ 8(b).   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
A Guideline B and C decision concerning Nigeria must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation in Nigeria, as well as the dangers existing in Nigeria.4 While 
there is no evidence Nigeria is a collector of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic 
information, Nigeria has very serious economic, military, political, judicial/legal and 
social problems. Nigeria and the United States are closely related in trade and 
diplomacy. Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa and about one million 
Nigerians live in the United States. The United States is Nigeria’s largest trading 
partner.     
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In 1989, Applicant was born in Nigeria. When she was nine years old, she and 
her parents immigrated to the United States from Nigeria. Applicant attended grammar 
school, high school, and college in the United States. In 2004, she became a U.S. 
citizen. Applicant lives with her brother in the United States. Her annual salary is 
$106,000. Her U.S. assets are valued at about $250,000, which includes equity in her 
home.  
 
After Applicant became a U.S. citizen, she renewed her Nigerian passport, and 
she used her Nigerian passport to travel to Nigeria in 2007, 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013, 
2014, and 2016. She used her Nigerian passport as a convenience because she did not 
need to get a visa and not out of loyalty to or a preference for Nigeria. In August 2016, 
Applicant renounced her Nigerian citizenship and returned her Nigerian passports to the 
Government of Nigeria. Applicant has a close relationship with her parents and sister, 
who are citizens and residents of Nigeria. She frequently communicates with them. Her 
family members in Nigeria do not have any connections to the Nigerian Government or 
Nigerian terrorists. 
 
The possibility of attempted exploitation of Applicant through her family in Nigeria 
is low. Applicant’s strong connections to the United States and especially to her U.S. 
family, community and employment establish “deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., [that she] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. interest.”   
 
After weighing the evidence of her connections to Nigeria and to the United 
States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has carried her burden of 
mitigating the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Foreign preference and foreign interest security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
