 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-07807 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristan A. Siegwart, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 In 1999, Applicant was convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). 
He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He repeatedly relapsed after alcohol 
treatment. On March 28, 2015, he ended his alcohol consumption, and he frequently 
attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings to reinforce his abstinence. Alcohol 
consumption security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is 
granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On October 3, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On May 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). 
  
On May 23, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On June 24, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 15, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. On September 12, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for October 6, 2016. (HE 1) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 4 exhibits; Applicant offered 12 
exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
(Transcript (Tr.) 8-10; Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-L) On 
October 13, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a major defense contractor, who has 
worked as an applications analyst, program manager, and sector director for 11 years. 
(Tr. 14; GE 1) In 1988, he received a bachelor’s degree in physics, computer science, 
and mathematics; in 1989, he received a master’s degree in physics; and in 1993, he 
received a Ph.D. in physics. (Tr. 13) He taught physics at the university level, and he 
worked for several technology companies and government contractors. (Tr. 13-14) In 
1991, he married, and he has a 22-year-old son. (Tr. 12; GE 1) He has held a security 
clearance since 2009, and there is no evidence of security violations. (Tr. 15)  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant’s inpatient alcohol treatment records describe alcohol consumption 
beginning before he attended grammar school. (GE 4, 5) He continued to consume 
alcohol at increasing levels through his college years. (GE 4, 5; AE A-AE C) Applicant 
observed that his alcohol consumption was increasing, and he received some alcohol 
counseling in the mid-1990s. (Tr. 15-16) He disclosed his alcohol-related treatment on 
his October 3, 2014 SCA and his May 7, 2015 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
personal subject interview (PSI). (AE A)  
 
In May 1998, Applicant was arrested for DUI. (Tr. 30-31; SOR ¶ 1.b response; 
AE A) His blood alcohol content was about .26. (Tr. 45) At times he consumed a liter of 
alcohol in an evening. In September 1998, he received alcohol detoxification treatment, 
and he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. (SOR ¶ 1.c response) In March 1999, he 
pleaded guilty to DUI, and the court imposed a fine, probation for one year, and 
suspended his driver’s license for six months. (SOR ¶ 1.c response) He continued with 
sporadic alcohol counseling and AA meetings in 2000. (Tr. 17) From March to April 
1999, and in February 2001, Applicant was an inpatient for alcohol detoxification. (Tr. 
 
3 
                                         
 
18; SCA) After leaving the hospital, Applicant attended numerous AA meetings, and he 
was sober for almost 13 years from February 2001 until November 2013, when he 
resumed his alcohol consumption. (Tr. 19) 
 
In February 2014, Applicant voluntarily sought alcohol treatment, and he 
attended 28 days of inpatient alcohol treatment and counseling. (Tr. 21; GE 3) He was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. (Tr. 21, 35; SOR ¶ 1.d response) After leaving alcohol 
treatment, he was sober for about two months, and then he resumed his alcohol 
consumption. (Tr. 22) On March 28, 2015, he realized he needed to establish and 
reinforce his abstinence, and he voluntarily sought alcohol treatment. (Tr. 22; SOR ¶ 1.e 
response) He received an additional 28 days of inpatient alcohol treatment and 
counseling. (Tr. 24) He has been sober since March 28, 2015. (Tr. 30, 46) His 2015 
therapy focused on avoiding and resisting alcohol triggers and use of AA meetings to 
reinforce abstinence. (Tr. 23) In April 2015, he began a program of attending at least 90 
AA meetings in 90 days. (Tr. 26-28) He currently attends three to five AA meetings each 
week. (Tr. 26)  
 
After April 2015, Applicant made increased efforts to live a healthier lifestyle. (Tr. 
28-29) He concurred with the diagnosis of alcohol dependence, and he acknowledged 
the requirement for his abstinence from alcohol consumption. (Tr. 35-36) The person 
who diagnosed him as alcohol dependent in 2014 and 2015 is a psychologist or 
physician. (Tr. 47) The reason Applicant relapsed after almost 13 years of alcohol 
abstinence was because he had grown complacent about being sober. He had stopped 
attending AA meetings and had lost that group’s support. He incorrectly believed he had 
the self-control to maintain sobriety or at least to drink responsibly without the frequent 
reinforcement provided by attending AA meetings. Now he fully understands that 
ongoing reinforcement through attendance at AA meetings is essential for him to 
maintain sobriety; he must not become complacent; and he must continue to be vigilant 
about maintaining sobriety and avoiding triggers for alcohol use. (Tr. 35-43)   
 
Applicant’s spouse is a nurse practitioner. (Tr. 57) She is very supportive of 
Applicant’s sobriety. (Tr. 29, 51-58) They do not have any alcohol in their home. (Tr. 29) 
She said she would report his resumption of alcohol consumption to his security 
manager. (Tr. 57) 
 
Applicant’s AA sponsor has known him for 18 months. (AE E) Applicant regularly 
attends AA meetings, and he sees his AA sponsor at least twice a week, when 
Applicant is not on temporary duty away from his residence. (AE E)   
 
Character Evidence 
 
A Ph.D. software engineer, who works closely with Applicant and has known him 
for ten years socially and professionally, said he has never observed Applicant 
consuming alcohol. (Tr. 62) Applicant contributes to mission accomplishment. (Tr. 63) If 
Applicant returns to alcohol consumption, he committed to reporting Applicant’s return 
to alcohol consumption to his security manager. (Tr. 66) He recommends continuation 
of Applicant’s security clearance. (Tr. 64)       
 
4 
                                         
 
 Applicant provided character reference statements from three coworkers.1 The 
general sense of the letters is that Applicant is diligent, dedicated, reliable, trustworthy, 
and sincerely seeking to continue his rehabilitation and maintain his sobriety. The 
character references support reinstatement of his security clearance. His performance 
evaluations and resume describe his hard work, accomplishments, competence, 
professionalism, and important contributions to his company. (AE I-AE L)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
                                            
1The three character letters are at AE F-AE H. 
 
5 
                                         
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Four alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence;2 and 
                                            
2In 1952, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) published the first of a series of Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manuals of Mental Disorders. In 2000, the APA published the DSM–IV–TR. The criteria for 
“alcohol abuse” and “alcohol dependence” in AG ¶ 22 are drawn from the DSM-IV-TR, which was in effect 
when the Adjudicative Guidelines were issued in 2006. In May 2013, the APA issued the 5th edition of the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM–5).The criteria in DSM-IV-TR for alcohol 
dependence and in DSM-5 for alcohol use disorder (AUD) are objective, well established, and rely 
primarily on self-reports and descriptions. DSM–5 integrates the two DSM–IV disorders, alcohol abuse 
and alcohol dependence, into a single disorder called alcohol use disorder (AUD) with mild, moderate, 
 
6 
                                         
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant’s SCA, OPM PSI, SOR response, and hearing record establish AG ¶¶ 
22(a), 22(c), 22(d), and 22(f). He had one DUI arrest in 1998, which resulted in a DUI 
conviction in 1999. Applicant engaged in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of 
impaired judgment.3 He voluntarily attended inpatient alcohol treatment on multiple 
occasions, and he relapsed after each treatment session, except for the treatment in 
March-April 2015. He was repeatedly diagnosed as alcohol dependent.  
  
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
                                                                                                                                            
and severe sub-classifications. DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 are used throughout the medical and legal 
communities to determine alcohol dependence and AUD severe, which have the same criteria. AUD-
moderate overlaps with both alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence. The DSM-5 notes that, “early 
remission from a DSM-5 substance use disorder is defined as at least 3 but less than 12 months without 
substance use disorder criteria (except craving), and sustained remission is defined as at least 12 months 
without criteria (except craving).” Additionally the new DSM-5 includes “in a controlled environment” and 
“on maintenance therapy” as the situation warrants. The alcohol consumption guideline does not 
incorporate DSM remission criteria and leaves mitigation to a case-by-case determination. See National  
Institute of Health, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism website, “Alcohol Use Disorder: A 
Comparison Between DSM–IV and DSM–5 http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/dsmfactsheet/dsm 
fact.pdf. (HE 4) See also American Psychiatric Association, “Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to 
DSM-5,” at 15, (Substance Abuse Disorders), http://www.dsm5.org/documents/changes%20from% 
20dsm-iv-tr%20to%20dsm-5.pdf. (HE 5) 
 
3Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted 
definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The 
definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 
NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ 
winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf. 
 
7 
                                         
 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) applies. On March 28, 2015, Applicant ended his alcohol 
consumption; he completed a 28-day inpatient alcohol treatment program; and he 
attends at least three AA meetings a week to reinforce his abstinence. Applicant is 
credited with voluntarily seeking alcohol treatment. After 1999, he sought treatment 
before being arrested for DUI or other criminal offense and before it affected his 
employment.    
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of 
substantial alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless 
there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR 
Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).     
 
I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption, Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption, his almost 13 year period of 
alcohol abstinence from 2001 to 2014, his 19-months of alcohol abstinence from March 
28, 2015, to the present, his supportive spouse, coworker, and AA sponsor, and his 
sincere commitment to continued alcohol abstinence. He has a “sustained period of 
remission” under DSM-5 because he has more than 12 months of abstinence. See note 
2, supra. He has not had any alcohol-related incidents involving the police and courts 
since 1998. Applicant has eliminated doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Alcohol consumption security concerns are mitigated.   
 
8 
                                         
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a major defense contractor, who has 
worked as an applications analyst, program manager, and sector director for 11 years. 
He has a bachelor’s degree in physics, computer science, and mathematics; a master’s 
degree in physics; and a Ph.D. in physics. He taught physics at the university level, and 
he worked for several technology companies and government contractors. He has held 
a security clearance since 2009, and there is no evidence of security violations.   
 
The general sense of Applicant’s character statements and performance 
evaluations is that Applicant is diligent, dedicated, reliable, trustworthy, provides 
important contributions to his employer, and sincerely seeks to continue his 
rehabilitation and maintain sobriety. The character evidence supports continuation of his 
security clearance.   
 
A Ph.D. software engineer, who works closely with Applicant and has known him 
for ten years socially and professionally, and Applicant’s spouse made statements 
during his hearing. They strongly support his continued alcohol abstinence. If Applicant 
resumes his alcohol consumption, they committed to reporting Applicant’s return to 
alcohol consumption to his security manager.       
 
Applicant has a long history of serious alcohol abuse. In 1999, he was convicted 
of DUI. He attended inpatient alcohol treatment or detoxification on five occasions. He 
was repeatedly diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He was abstinent from alcohol 
consumption for almost 13 years from 2001 to 2014. He has been abstinent++++++++ 
from alcohol consumption for 19 months from March 28, 2015 to present. Under DSM-5, 
 
9 
                                         
 
he currently has a “sustained period of remission” because he has more than 12 months 
of abstinence. He has not had any alcohol-related incidents involving the police and 
courts since 1998, and such incidents are unlikely to recur. He has attended hundreds 
of AA meetings. He has sincerely committed to abstain from alcohol consumption. He 
has established his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Alcohol consumption security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
