 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01285 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 10, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on  
January 27, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on February 4, 2016.  Applicant had 30 
days to submit a response to the FORM. He timely submitted a response to the FORM. 
(Item 8) Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response to the FORM. On 
August 3, 2016, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on 
August 5, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations. (Item 1)    
 
 Applicant is being sponsored by a DOD contractor and is applying for a security 
clearance. He has been sponsored by the DOD contractor since April 2014. If he 
receives a security clearance, he will be hired. He has a high school diploma. He is 
divorced and has two sons, ages 18 and 20. (Item 3)   
 
On May 8, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3) A subsequent background investigation 
revealed the following delinquent accounts which are alleged in the SOR: a $62,145 
child support account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 6 at 6); a $59,424 
child support account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 7 at 1-2); a $405 
charged off account. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 6 at 11; Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 3); and a deficiency 
balance for a repossessed automobile in the amount of $11,777 which was charged off. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 6 at 9; Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 3)  
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a federal tax lien for tax year 2012 in the 
amount of $2,075 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 6 at 4; Item 7 at 3); a federal tax lien for tax year 
2014 in the amount of $1,486 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 6 at 4; Item 7 at 3); a state tax lien for tax 
year 2011 in the amount of $2,363 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 6 at 4; Item 7 at 3); a $10,103 
judgment entered against Applicant on behalf of a bank (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 5 at 10; Item 6 
at 5, 9, 11; Item 7 at 3); and a $434 cell phone account that was placed for collection. 
(SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 6 at 8, 10; Item 7 at 2, 3) 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant claims the child support arrearages were 
added during his divorce proceedings in 2007.  They were not the result of his refusal to 
pay child support. Applicant claims that he paid maximum amounts of child support and 
mortgage arrearages during the two years he and his wife were separated before the 
divorce.  The family court judge did not accept Applicant’s documentation proving he 
provided support for two years. The judge concluded the payments were “a gift since 
they were not court-ordered.” The judge concluded that Applicant was past due on his 
child support obligations for two years. (Item 2 at 1). Applicant provided a copy of his 
child support payment history for State A. (Item 2 at 5-9) He also provided a statement 
from State B’s Division of Child Support Enforcement which released the lien filed 
against him for arrearages. (Item 2 at 10) State B’s child support enforcement was 
erroneous because his children resided in State A. SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
Applicant admits the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.h. However, he is 
disputing the deficiency balance from the repossessed automobile alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h. He disputes the cell phone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. He claims the cell phone 
company overcharged him, and that the debt has since been forgiven.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant admits the tax debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. Although not 
alleged in the SOR, he admits that he did not file his federal and state tax returns in 
2011, 2012, and 2014. He mentions in his response to the SOR that he was in the 
process of filing his tax returns. (Item 2 at 2) In his response to the FORM, Applicant 
provided proof that a tax preparer completed his tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, 
2013, and 2014. The tax returns indicate Applicant owed $154 for tax year 2014, and 
$758 for tax year 2012. He was to receive a refund in tax years 2011 and 2013. It is 
unclear whether the tax returns were filed with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
based on the documentation provided. It also unclear whether the IRS assessed any 
penalties for Applicant’s late tax filings. (Item 9 at 5-8)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant claims he was making payments towards 
his state income taxes for tax year 2011. He did not provide proof that the state tax 
return for 2001 was filed or proof of payments made.   
 
The status of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $62,145 child support arrearages that was placed for collection in 
State A.  A credit report dated, September 24, 2015, lists the balance of the child 
support arrearages as $62,145. Applicant provided proof of his child support payments 
to State A from late 2007 to April 22, 2014. It is noted that between January 2012 to 
April 2014, Applicant did not always make regular monthly payments. Applicant did not 
provide information about the status of his child support payments since April 2014. The 
status of Applicant’s child support arrearages remains uncertain. (Item, 2 at 6-9; Item 8 
at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $59,424 child support arrearage account placed for collection in State 
B. State B Division of Child Support Enforcement released a lien filed against Applicant. 
Applicant is paying child support to State A, the state where his sons reside. SOR ¶ 1.b 
is found for Applicant. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $405 debt owed to a bank: Applicant claims he entered into a 
payment agreement with this creditor. He provided copies of a proposed settlement 
agreement. However, he did not provide proof that he was making payments towards 
this debt, such as receipts or bank records. (Item 2 at 11) The debt remains listed on his 
credit report. (Item 8 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: automobile repossession debt, charged off in the amount of $11,177. 
Applicant admits his automobile was repossessed, but disputes the amount of the 
deficiency judgment. He has not described what steps he has taken to dispute the debt. 
The status of the account is unknown. (Item 2 at 2; Item 8 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $2,075 federal income tax lien filed against Applicant for tax year 
2012.  Applicant admits this debt. Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant admits 
that he did not file his federal taxes for tax year 2012. On March 8, 2016, an income tax 
preparation firm prepared Applicant’s 2012 federal income tax returns. Applicant owes 
 
4 
 
 
$758 for tax year 2012. It is not clear from the record whether he sent a check to the 
IRS for this debt. It is also not clear whether Applicant will be assessed a penalty by the 
IRS for failure to timely file his income taxes. (Item 9 at 7)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: $1,486 federal income tax lien filed against Applicant for tax year 
2014.  Applicant admits this debt. Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant admits 
that he did not file his federal taxes for tax year 2014. On March 8, 2016, an income tax 
preparation firm prepared Applicant’s 2014 federal income tax return. Applicant owes 
$154 for tax year 2014. It is not clear from the record whether he filed the return and 
whether he sent a check to the IRS for this debt. It is also not clear whether Applicant 
will be assessed a penalty by the IRS for failure to timely file his income taxes. (Item 9 
at 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $2,363 owed for state income taxes for tax year 2011. Applicant 
admits that he owes this debt. He provided no documentation about the status of this 
debt. It is unresolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: $10,103 judgment entered against Applicant in 2011 on behalf of a 
bank. Applicant claims that he made payment arrangements and that the balance is 
only $921.44. (Item 2 at 12)  He provided proof that he made a payment in the amount 
of $230.36 on March 2, 2016. (Item 9 at 4) It is noted while the creditor is the same, the 
account numbers are different for the $921.44 debt and the $10,103 judgment. These 
are two different accounts. (See Item 2 at 12; Item 8 at 1) No information was provided 
about the current balance of the judgment. It remains unresolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: $434 cell phone account placed for collection. Applicant disputes this 
debt. He believes it was resolved because Verizon opened another account with him. 
The debt is no longer on his credit report. (Item 2 at 13; Item 8)    
 
Applicant  has been unemployed since October 2011. He has supported himself 
with unemployment and income from odd jobs. Applicant also has his own company, 
but it is unclear how much income he receives from the company. (Item 4)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
 
5 
 
 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has 
encountered financial problems for many years, beginning with a delinquent child 
support obligation and several delinquent accounts. He also had outstanding tax 
obligations for 2012 and 2014 and a state tax obligation for 2011.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
7 
 
 
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial obligations are recent 
and ongoing. Applicant made payments towards his child support obligations, but the 
record evidence only establishes payments between November 2007 to April 2014. 
Applicant’s child support arrearages are still above $50,000. While Applicant claims he 
entered into payment agreements towards the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h, he 
did not provide documented proof of consistent payments or what the current balance is 
on each debt. He has made no payments towards the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.   
While Applicant consulted a tax preparation firm to prepare his tax returns, he did not 
provide proof that he filed the forms with the IRS. He also did not provide proof that he 
paid the taxes owed. While Applicant states that he disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.d, he did not provide documentation of his efforts to dispute the balance of the 
automobile repossession. Applicant’s financial issues are ongoing and raise questions 
about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies. Applicant has been unemployed since 2011 after a 
contract ended from his previous employer. However, I cannot conclude Applicant 
behaved responsibly under the circumstances. While the loss of his job affected 
Applicant’s ability to pay his debts, several of his debts became delinquent before he 
became unemployed.  Applicant does not explain why he was unable to find another job 
within the past five years. For this reason, AG & 20(b) is given less weight.  
 
Not only does Applicant owe federal and state income taxes, he admits that he 
did not file his income tax returns in 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014. Applicant did not file 
his tax returns until March 2016, after receiving the Government’s FORM in February 
2016. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the DOHA Appeal 
Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be 
considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to 
consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
(d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 
at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR derogatory information 
accordingly. While the failure to file his tax returns was not alleged in the SOR, it can 
and will be considered under matters of mitigation. 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because Applicant did not attend financial counseling. 
The status of most of his delinquent accounts remain unresolved. His financial situation 
remains uncertain.  
 
AG & 20(d) does not apply, because Applicant did not demonstrate that he made 
a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. While Applicant consulted a tax 
preparer in order to complete his tax returns, there is no proof that the tax returns were 
actually filed or that he paid the debt owed to the IRS. He provided proof that he made a  
payment towards the debt alleged in SOR & 1.h in March 2016. However, he provided 
no information regarding the status of this debt or the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.d.  Furthermore, Applicant provided his child support payment history up to April 2014. 
There is nothing in the record indicating his payment history since April 2014.  Applicant 
took steps towards resolving his delinquent accounts after he received the FORM in 
January 2016. Applicant’s efforts to resolve his delinquent accounts were minimal and 
did not demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.   
 
AG & 20(e) applies with respect to the child support debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
Two different states (State A and State B) were attempting to collect child support. 
Neither Applicant or his children resided in the State B which was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
State B released their lien. The delinquent cell phone account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is 
found for Applicant because the account no longer appears on his credit report and the 
cell phone company in question allowed Applicant to open up a new account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts that would mitigate financial 
 
9 
 
 
considerations security concerns. While the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.i were 
successfully disputed, the status of the remaining accounts remain uncertain. Because 
Applicant remains unemployed, it is unlikely that he has sufficient income to meet his 
financial obligations. Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from financial 
considerations. 
 
 Although Applicant took steps to resolve his federal tax debts when he hired a 
tax preparer to prepare his federal income tax returns for 2011 – 2014, he did not take 
action until after he received the FORM.  A recent DOHA Appeal Board case states:  
 
Security requirements include consideration of a person’s judgment, 
reliability, and a sense of his or her legal obligations. Cafeteria & 
Restaurant Worker’s Union, Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 
(D.C. Cir. 1960); aff’d 367 U.S. 886 (1961) Failure to comply with Federal 
and/or state tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
abiding by well-established Government rules and regulations. Voluntary 
compliance with rules and regulations is essential for protecting classified 
information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 
2016). Applicant’s repeated failure to file his Federal income tax returns in 
a timely manner does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment 
and reliability required or persons granted access to classified information.  
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015)   
 
ISCR Case No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016)  
 
 While Applicant appears to have filed the federal tax returns. He provided no 
evidence regarding the status of the 2011 state tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. He 
provided no proof that he paid the IRS the taxes owed for tax years 2012 and 2014 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e, and 1.f) Furthermore, his failure to file his federal income tax returns over 
a period of several years raises questions about his ability to follow rules and 
regulations which raises additional questions about his ability to handle classified 
information.   
 
 Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the granting of a security clearance is 
not warranted. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light 
of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. It is too soon to conclude that 
Applicant’s financial matters are not of security significance. The security concerns 
raised under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c - 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.i:   For Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
