 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01411 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) and it was mailed to Applicant. It was received on March 8, 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days from receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not object to the Government evidence, which is identified as Items 2 through 6. 
Applicant provided documents that are marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D.1 
The Government and Applicant’s documents are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on September 28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. He denied 
the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He graduated from high school in 1995. He married in 
1998 and divorced in 2000. He has an 18-year-old child from the marriage. He has 
worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since 2008.  
  
 The delinquent debts, judgments, and tax lien alleged in the SOR are supported 
by credit reports from May 2014 and September 2015. Applicant was put on notice 
about the debts and judgments alleged in the SOR when he was interviewed by a 
government investigator in June 2014.2 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, which alleged he failed to file Federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011. He also admitted 
that he had a federal tax lien filed against him in November 2014 in the amount of 
$13,403. (SOR ¶ 1.b) In his answer to the SOR, he stated he was not aware his taxes 
were not filed until the end of 2011. He was working with a tax service to complete his 
tax returns and sent them money every year believing the returns were handled. At 
some point, he stated he received a letter that the tax service was being sued and was 
going out of business. Applicant stated he contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
to determine if his tax returns had been filed and was advised they had not. Applicant 
further stated that in 2012 he contacted a certified public accountant to help him resolve 
the issue. He indicated that the IRS did not have his new address, so it was unable to 
contact him earlier. Once he provided the address, the IRS was able to contact him. He 
stated he owed back taxes and learned there was a tax lien. He indicated that in the 
past he had claimed too many exemptions, which caused him problems, but in 2012 he 
began claiming zero and his subsequent refunds have been applied to his unpaid 
taxes.3  
 
 Applicant provided a letter from the accountant he hired in 2012 stating that 
Applicant’s individual tax returns have been filed through tax year 2015. It did not 
indicate when the tax returns were filed. The letter stated that Applicant had a 
                                                          
1 AE D includes copies of the documents the Government provided to Applicant. 
 
2 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 Item 2.  
 
3 
 
 
discrepancy in reported income for tax years prior to 2011, which resulted in the tax lien. 
The accountant indicated that the matter is still being resolved.4  
 
 Applicant indicated in his security clearance application (SCA) that he did not file 
his tax returns on time for the last ten years. He began working with the tax service 
around 2008, when he estimated he was already five years behind in filing his tax 
returns. He indicated he would periodically check with the tax preparers on the status of 
his returns, until he received a letter that the service had gone out of business.5 In 
reference to his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 2013, 
Applicant stated the following:  
 
I was taking more exemptions out of my paycheck to try and get myself 
out of the financial bind I was in and I was irresponsible and in a lot of debt 
and not aware of the trouble I could get into by not getting this taken care 
of in a timely fashion. I’m by no means trying to avoid paying taxes and 
once I get out of this mess, I won’t put myself back in this predicament.6  
 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR and his statements in his SCA are inconsistent. In 
his response to the FORM, Applicant stated the reason he was “so behind was not 
being aware of the seriousness and my not being as responsible as I should have 
been.”7 He stated that he owed $31,711 for those years he did not file his tax returns. 
He stated that his tax refunds have been applied to his tax debt and the debt has been 
reduced by about $9,190. He is hoping to secure an offer and compromise settlement 
from the IRS for the remaining $22,521 owed.  
 
 Applicant disputed the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b ($893) stating that last year he 
saw the debt was listed on his credit report and contacted the creditor to dispute it. He 
indicated he is working to have the debt removed from his credit report and has sought 
the assistance from a law firm. He claimed he was never served notice, and if it was a 
legitimate debt he would pay it.8 In his response to the FORM, he stated that he has not 
received additional information after he disputed the debt.9 He did not provide evidence 
or documents of actions he has taken to have the judgment reversed. This debt is 
unresolved. 
 
                                                          
4 AE B. 
 
5 Item 3 page 38. 
 
6 Item 3 page 38. The SOR does not allege tax years 2012 and 2013. I will not consider this information 
for disqualifying purposes, but will consider it when applying the mitigating conditions and when analyzing 
Applicant’s credibility and the whole person. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Item 2.  
 
9 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant also disputed the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,250) for medical services. 
He claimed he was never served notice, but indicated he paid $400 toward the debt and 
is working to pay the remainder. In his response to the FORM, he provided an email 
from the creditor indicating his current balance was $620. Applicant stated he had 
agreed to pay $150 for the next three months and $170 the last month.10 He did not 
provide documentary proof of his assertions.11 
 
 Applicant admitted the debt for child support arrearages in SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,900). 
He indicated that he and his ex-wife had their own child support agreement before it 
was enforced by the child support services. He stated he and his ex-wife were bad with 
finances. He stated he would help her out when she needed money, in addition to the 
child support payments he would provide. He did not keep good records. At some point, 
she sought assistance from the state’s child support services. Applicant stated he was 
ordered by a court to pay an extra $100 a month towards the arrearages and it has 
been automatically withdrawn from his paycheck since the order. In his response to the 
FORM, Applicant indicated that he reduced the arrearage to $2,200. Applicant did not 
provide any documents to show consistent payments or the current balance of the 
arrearage.12 
 
 Applicant disputed the debts in SOR ¶ 1.f through 1.n, which were collection 
accounts associated with his failure to pay for the use of an electronic pass permitting 
him to use express lanes on a highway. He stated that he had used his girlfriend’s pass, 
and it did not work properly. He stated he never received any letters stating he owed 
money for the toll. Eventually he received a bill for $6,500 for unpaid tolls that were in 
collection. He contacted the original creditor and the department of motor vehicle (DMV) 
and learned that the DMV had his old address attached to the vehicle he had at the time 
of the infractions. He claimed he did not own the car until after he moved from his old 
residence on file. He stated he worked with the creditor and had the amount owed 
reduced to $1,670. He stated the debt was completely paid in January 2015. He 
provided a letter from the creditor dated March 2016 that indicated there is a zero 
balance owed.13 In his response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that the toll violations 
were the result of a broken transponder and the company did not have Applicant’s 
correct address. He did not provide an explanation for why he failed to timely update his 
address with the DMV.14  
 
 Applicant explained that he made some mistakes and was not very responsible, 
but he is attempting to rectify his mistakes. He admitted he was not very good with his 
                                                          
10 AE A, C.  
 
11 Item 2. 
 
12 Item 2; AE A. 
 
13 Item 2, AE D. 
 
14 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
finances. He stated he began trying to fix his problems before the security clearance 
process started.15  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
15 Item 2; AE A.  
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.16 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2007 
through 2011. He has an unpaid tax lien that was entered against him. He has 
judgments against him and delinquent debts that are unresolved. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
                                                          
16 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. He failed to timely file his Federal and state 
income tax returns and has an unresolved tax lien. He has judgments that were filed in 
2008 and 2010 that are unresolved. He continues to have an account in collection for 
child support arrearages. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant explained in his SCA that his repeated failure to file his Federal and 
state tax returns was because he was having financial problems and apparently claimed 
exemptions so he could have more money available to address those problems. He 
later claimed that his tax preparer went out of business, but he also admitted his tax 
returns were already delinquent for a period of five years. He did not provide 
explanations regarding his other delinquent debts. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude his financial problems were beyond his control, and he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant is working with an accountant to resolve his tax issues. He did not 
provide evidence that he has made any independent payments toward his tax 
delinquency, but has only had his tax refunds applied to the debt. He did not provide 
any documents, other than a letter from his accountant, to show the amount of his 
current tax liability. He did not provide documents from the IRS to substantiate his 
 
8 
 
 
claims. He has not provided evidence of actions taken to resolve the judgment in SOR ¶ 
1.b. He did provide an email showing he has reduced the balance owed on the 
judgment entered in 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c). He failed to provide documentary evidence that 
he is paying his child support arrearages. There is no evidence Applicant has had 
financial counseling, and I am unable to conclude that there are clear indications his 
financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant provided evidence that he has resolved the toll violation collection 
accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.n. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these allegations. Applicant 
did not provide supporting evidence that he is making payments towards his child 
support arrearage or the judgment in SOR 1.¶ 1.b. Although there is some evidence he 
has reduced the balance owed in SOR ¶ 1.c, it is not sufficient to rise to the level of a 
good-faith effort to pay the overdue creditor. This judgment was entered eight years ago 
in 2008. Applicant was put on notice of the debt during his interview in 2014. Minimal 
progress has been made in resolving it. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to the remainder of 
the debts.  
 
 Applicant disputes the judgments entered against him, but failed to provide a 
reasonable basis for his dispute or documentary evidence of his actions to resolve the 
issues. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2008. He 
did not provide an explanation for his financial difficulties that could overcome the 
judgment concerns raised by his demonstrated financial irresponsibility.  His repeated 
failure to timely file his Federal and state tax returns is a serious concern. He owes a 
substantial tax lien and has two judgments that were entered in 2008 and 2010 that are 
not resolved. He failed to provide proof that he is addressing his child support 
arrearages. He has not established a reliable financial track record. Applicant has failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.n:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
