                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-------------------------------------               )     ADP Case No. 15-01145
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for holding a public trust
position is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On September 14, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a public position, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should
be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
 A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and1
Security, titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,” covering the handling of trustworthiness cases
under the Directive was issued on November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed  DOHA to continue to
utilize DOD Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations (to include those
involving ADP I, II. and III positions). (HE 1) Parenthetically, the Directive was designed to implement E.O.
10865. 
 
2
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 6, 2015, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 11, 2015, and did not submit any
information in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 22, 2016. 
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated three delinquent debts
exceeding $275,000 and concealed his assets by holding them in a private bank
account in someone else’s name. Allegedly, these listed debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed the delinquent debts covered in paragraphs 1.a-1.c represent
written off accounts by the lender after its acceptance of Applicant’s short sale offer. He
claimed his credit report would reflect the paid off amounts. Applicant claimed he kept
most of his cash at home while he was determining what his financial obligations were.
Further, he claimed that in the event his liable debts exceeded his ability to pay,
bankruptcy would have been his only viable option.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 61-year-old network engineer for a defense contractor who seeks
eligibility to hold a public trust position. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings
follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married his first spouse in January 1981 and divorced her in January
1984. (Item 3) He remarried in January 1994 and divorced his second spouse in
January 1996. (Item 1) Applicant has two adult children from his first marriage. He
claimed no post-high school educational credits or military service.
Applicant has been employed by his current employer since April 2014 as a
network engineer. (Item 1) He was employed by another contractor as a network
3
engineer between July 2011 and April 2014, and was self-employed between January
2003 and July 2011. (Item 1) 
Finances
In October 2005, Applicant opened a home equity line of credit with creditor 1.b
for $10,576. (Items 5-6). Applicant described the equity line as similar to a home equity
loan.  Credit reports document that creditor 1.b sold this account to a collection agency
in June 2013. (Items 5-6) Applicant claimed in a September 2015 interview with an
agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) he does not owe the amount of
money listed in the credit reports and SOR and has no intention of paying it. (Item 4) ,
and the account remains in collection status with the assigned collection agency.
In October 2006, Applicant obtained another home equity line of credit from
creditor 1.a in the amount of $228,938 on the same property securing the line of credit
dispensed to Applicant by creditor 1.b. (Items 4-6) In April 2007, he obtained another
home equity line of credit from a different lender on the same property (creditor 1.c) in
the amount of $31,400. (Items 4-6) After incurring difficulty selling the property, he
eventually sold the property in a short sale in April 2011. (Items 5-6) Whether the sale
brought enough in proceeds to cover Applicant’s home equity mortgages with creditors
1.a-1.c is uncertain and underdeveloped by Applicant. Based on the reported
information in his credit reports and the information he provided in his OPM interview, it
is unclear whether the short sale covered all of the debts owing on his creditor 1.a-1.c
home equity accounts.
 All of Applicant’s delinquent home equity loans covered by the listed creditor 1.b
and 1.c accounts  remain in default with no evidence of payment or payment plans
(Items 4-6) Two of the delinquent mortgage debts (creditors 1.a and 1.c) are reported
as charged-off accounts. (Items 5-6) The remaining debt with creditor 1.b continues to
be reported in collection status with no reported payment action. 
After failing to address his mortgage debts, Applicant continues to hold large
assets in his sister’s bank account that are reportedly worth in excess of $100,000.
(Item 4) Applicant continues to claim (albeit without any evidentiary support) that he is
no longer obligated to pay the amounts claimed by creditors 1.a-1.c. (Items to 2 and 4)
While contemplating filing for bankruptcy, he admitted to transferring ownership of his
assets to his sister for holding in her bank account while he contemplated filing for
bankruptcy. (Items 2 and 4) Whether his ownership transfers satisfy criteria for
characterizing them as fraudulent conveyances, they certainly reflect dishonest actions
on his part designed to place his assets beyond the reach of collection by his creditors
(notably creditors 1.a-1.c).   
Endorsements
Applicant provided no character references on his behalf, either with his answer
or with his response to the FORM.  Nor did he furnish any performance evaluations or
evidence of community and civic contributions. 
4
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
[privacy] information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security [trustworthiness] concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable public trust risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
5
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain public trust position eligibility. The required materiality showing, however,
does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has
actually mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a
security clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect privacy information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all trustworthiness
determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
“[T]rustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”
See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed network engineer for a defense contractor who
accumulated delinquent mortgage-related debts exceeding $275,000. Two of the
6
listed debts (i.e., the home equity lines of credit with creditors 1.a and 1.c) were
charged off and remain outstanding with no evidence of their being addressed by
Applicant to date. The remaining debt with creditor 1.b remains in collection status
with no evidence of any initiated payment action by Applicant. The record evidence
confirms that Applicant has made no payments on any of the listed lines of credit and
expressed no plans to do so.
Applicant’s collective accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application
of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,”  apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of
unaddressed delinquent debts covered in the SOR negate the need for any
independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of
Applicant’s listed filing lapses and debts are fully documented in his credit reports.
Some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s insufficiently explained accrual of
mortgage-related  debts with his lenders.  To date, he has taken no documented
corrective steps to resolve his delinquencies and demonstrate he acted responsibly in
addressing his listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Holding a public trust position involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the public trust position holder. Quite apart from any agreement the
public trust position holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the
public trust position holder’s duties and access to privacy information necessarily
imposes important duties of trust and candor on the public trust position holder that
are considerably higher than those typically imposed on Government employees and
contractors involved in other lines of Government business. See Snepp v. United
States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Dishonesty issues associated with Applicant’s transfer of assets to his sister for
holding compound judgment concerns over Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability.
By placing his assets beyond the reach while contemplating filing for bankruptcy,
Applicant impaired the ability of the creditors to enforcement their creditor rights. 
Applicant’s actions in placing his assets beyond the reach of his creditors raise
judgment and trust issues independently of trust concerns over his finances.
Applicable under the personal conduct guideline is the following disqualifying
condition: DC ¶ 16(c), “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.”
Whether Applicant ever pursues Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief is still very
difficult to predict. Should he ever decide to petition for Chapter 13 relief, his asset
7
transfers are potentially at risk to being determined fraudulent transfers under his
state’s law governing fraudulent conveyances and set asides. Based on the evidence
presented, none of the mitigating conditions  covered by Guidelines F and E apply to
Applicant’s situation.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent mortgage debts and
failure to resolve them. Resolution of his listed delinquent accounts is a critical
prerequisite to his regaining control of his finances. His ensuing placement of his
assets beyond the reach of his creditors adds to the judgment concerns associated
with his accrual of delinquent mortgage-related debts only adds to the judgment
concerns associated with his debt accruals. 
While unanticipated financial burdens might have played a considerable role in
his failures to address his delinquent debts, Applicant failed to provide more specific
explanatory material for consideration. Endorsements and performance evaluations
might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of her overall
clearance eligibility, but were not provided. 
Overall, public trust position eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the
limited amount of information available for consideration in this record does not
enable him to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome trust
concerns arising out of his lapses in judgment associated with his accumulation of
delinquent mortgage debts and placing his assets beyond the reach of his creditors.; 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s accrual of delinquent mortgage-related debt and his lack of more specific
explanations for his debt accruals and his lack of documented resolution of them, it is
still too soon to make safe predictions of  Applicant’s ability to satisfactorily resolve his
outstanding debts. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c of Guideline F and subparagraph 2.a of
Guideline E.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.d:      Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):              AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:                Against Applicant
   
8
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
