 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01682 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
September 26, 2012. On October 31, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR on December 3, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on February 3, 2016.  
 
 A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit documentary material to refute, extenuate, 
mitigate or explain the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 8, 
2016. She submitted a credit bureau report (CBR) (AE 1) dated April 13, 2016 in 
response to the FORM. She did not assert any objections to the Government’s 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on August 28, 2016. The Government’s 
exhibit’s included in the FORM (Items 1 to 4) and Applicant’s exhibit are admitted into 
evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has five delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$50,000. Applicant denied the SOR allegations with explanations. The evidence 
supports the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and is employed as a quality control manager for a 
construction company since 2006. She received an associate’s degree in 2004 and a 
bachelor’s degree in 2008. She is currently single. She was previously married in 1988 
and 2002, and divorced in 1993 and 2009, respectively. She has two children. She has 
held a DOD security clearance since 2007. 
 
Applicant’s actions with respect to the SOR allegations and the current status are 
noted below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Mortgage past due for 
$27,751 
Delinquency in 2008; 
negotiated and approved for 
loan modification and 
payments made. CBR 
shows loan modification 
and payments current. 
Resolved 
1.b Student loan charged- 
off for $23,960 
Delinquency in 2011; son 
responsible to pay, but 
Applicant cosigned on the 
account. Applicant making 
payments. CBR confirmed. 
Resolved 
 
3 
 
1.c Medical debt for $3,065 Delinquency in 2010. 
Applicant believed her 
medical insurance would 
cover debt. Believes debt is 
in error and not her 
responsibility. 
Disputes debt; but no 
evidence of formal dispute. 
Not resolved. 
1.d Medical debt for $140 Applicant claims account 
paid; no longer appears on 
CBR. 
Claims resolved but not 
documented. 
1.e Homeowners 
association judgment for 
$1,286 
Applicant fell behind on 
payments after divorce. 
Used 401k money to pay 
debt. CBR shows judgment 
satisfied in 2013. 
Account is current and paid 
up to date. Resolved 
 
 Applicant fell behind on debts as a result of her last divorce, and from admitted 
carelessness and irresponsibility. The student loan is primarily the responsibility of her 
son, but he defaulted on payments, so she is making payments as the cosignor. She 
has not received any financial counseling or used a debt consolidation service, but her 
current credit bureau report shows no new delinquencies. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
 
4 
 
decision.3 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debts after a divorce in 2009. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has made significant effort to resolve her debts. She renegotiated a 
home mortgage and has been making payments as required. She took over her son’s 
student loan payments when he defaulted, and is current. She is disputing a medical 
debt that she believes her insurance company is responsible for, and asserts that she 
paid the smaller medical debt. Finally, she used her 401k retirement account to pay a 
delinquent homeowner’s association judgment and is current on all payments. Her 
efforts have been satisfactory to demonstrate that her financial circumstances are under 
control and that she is willing and able to meet her financial obligations. Her current 
credit bureau report shows no new delinquencies. Mitigating conditions ¶ 20 (a), (b), (c), 
and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Overall, the record leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   For Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
