 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02710 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and J (criminal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 6, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On October 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and J.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
 
2 
 
 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued.  
 
On November 17, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On February 29, 
2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 9, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 1, 
2016, DOHA issued a notice of hearing setting the hearing for April 20, 2016. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did 
not call any witnesses, and did not offer any exhibits. On April 28, 2016, DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) At the conclusion of the hearing, I held the record open 
until May 20, 2016, and subsequently granted Applicant two extensions until July 29, 
2016, and August 31, 2016, to afford him an opportunity to submit additional evidence. 
Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) AE A through V, which were received into 
evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d – 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.m, 1.n, 2.a, 2.b, and 
2.d; and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, 1.j – 1.l, and 2.c. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old cost analyst employed by a defense contractor since 
August 2014. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance as a condition of his 
continued employment. Applicant has successfully held a security clearance since 
2008 when he began working for a defense contractor. (GE 1; Tr. 15-17)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1999. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree in finance in May 2004. Applicant is “one class away” from earning 
a second bachelor of science degree in accounting, which he undertook to take the 
certified public accounting examination, but “things change[d].” He also took several 
graduate-level courses through his employer. (GE 1; Tr. 17-20) 
 
Applicant was married from June 2004 to January 2014, and that marriage 
ended by divorce. He has a 15-year-old daughter and a 10-year-old son from that 
marriage. Applicant’s children reside with their mother and he pays her $352 in 
monthly child support. His former spouse works full-time in a doctor’s office. Applicant 
did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 20-24) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 14 allegations under this concern. One allegation is a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in November 2011 that was dismissed in January 2014. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) The remaining 13 allegations document debts totaling $171,256.  (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a – 1.n; SOR answer; AE G) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems stemming from three layoffs in 2006, 
2009, and 2010, underemployment, and his 2014 divorce. (Tr. 24-28) Unable to make 
his mortgage payments after his 2010 layoff, Applicant filed under Chapter 13 
primarily to prevent the loss of his home. His Chapter 13 was dismissed when 
Applicant was unable to make payments under the wage earner’s plan due to lack of 
income. (Tr. 28-31) 
 
On May 19, 2016, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. On his petition, he 
listed assets of $131,250, and liabilities of $197,983.  (AE P, AE R) On August 24, 
2016, he filed an amended petition that listed assets of $135,388, and liabilities of 
$232,210. (Tr. 30-57; AE L, AE P, AE V) Applicant was granted a discharge on August 
18, 2016. (AE P, AE U) His SOR debts were included in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
(AE P, AE S)  
 
On August 18, 2016, Applicant completed the mandatory financial counseling 
as part of the bankruptcy process. (AE P, AE T) Applicant’s gross annual income is 
$67,500. His gross monthly income is $5,625, his net monthly income is $3,733, and 
his net monthly remainder is $363. Applicant’s monthly budget reflects that he is living 
a modest lifestyle and living within his means. (Tr. 57-62; AE P, AE V) 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists four allegations under this concern. These allegations all 
occurred while Applicant was going through a contentious divorce. In March 2013, he 
was arrested and charged with violence and criminal trespass and issued a protection 
from abuse order. In September 2013, he was again arrested and charged with 
domestic violence, criminal mischief, and violation of a protection and abuse order. He 
testified that his former spouse was manipulating the legal system and that all of the 
charges against him were subsequently dismissed. He corroborated his testimony with 
post-hearing documentation. Applicant further testified that he was seeking to have 
those arrest records expunged. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.d; SOR answer; Tr. 62-77; AE C – F, 
AE H – K) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted three reference letters from former co-workers. All of these 
individuals stated that Applicant was trustworthy, contributing to the national defense, 
and recommended him for a security clearance. One of the individuals is a former Air 
 
4 
 
 
Force officer and pointed out that the acquisition field needs qualified people like the 
Applicant. (AE B, AE M, AE O) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
 
5 
 
 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
   
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(c) apply. Appellant’s finances were adversely affected 
by his divorce, unemployment, and underemployment, which are conditions largely 
beyond his control. He acted responsibly under the circumstances on August 18, 
2016, when all of his delinquent nonpriority, unsecured debts were discharged under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.1 It was evident that Applicant found himself in a 
difficult situation, but he has managed to overcome what he no doubt thought was an 
overwhelming life event and is in the process of regaining financial responsibility. 
 
 Appellant received financial counseling and generated a budget as part of the 
bankruptcy process. His negative financial situation “occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [Appellant’s] 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” under AG ¶ 20(a). He “acted 
responsibly under the circumstances,” and “the problem is being resolved or is under 
control” as required under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c). Appellant did not provide 
documentation showing he disputed any of his SOR debts, and AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply to any of his SOR debts.      
  
 In sum, Appellant has mitigated all of the delinquent debts listed on his SOR. 
He has not generated any new delinquent debts after his nonpriority unsecured debts 
were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. His resolution of his 
delinquent debts through the bankruptcy process shows sufficient effort, good 
                                                          
1
There is some duplication of debts in Appellant’s bankruptcy schedules. In a bankruptcy filing, 
most debtors list potential creditors, even when the debt may have been resold or transferred to a 
different collection agent or creditor, to ensure notice, and reduce the risk of subsequent dismissal of 
the bankruptcy. If Appellant failed to list some nonpriority unsecured debts on his bankruptcy schedule, 
this failure to list such debts does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, in a no-asset bankruptcy, all 
unsecured, nonpriority debts are discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a discharge, even when 
they are not listed on a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 1996); 
Francis v. Nat’l Revenue Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr. S.D. FL 2010), but see First Circuit Bucks 
Majority on Discharge of Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, American Bankruptcy Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 
(Nov. 2009). There is no requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to discharge the debt. Collier on 
Bankruptcy, Matthey Bender & Company, Inc., 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a)(3)(A). Some categories 
of priority obligations are listed on bankruptcy schedules, but are not discharged by bankruptcy, such as 
tax debts, student loan debts, and child support obligations. 
 
7 
 
 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability to warrant mitigation of financial 
considerations concerns. 
 
 Criminal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 30 articulates the security concern relating to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 provides two criminal conduct disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses”;  and “(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.” The Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 
31(c) by the evidence presented. 
 
  Four criminal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (d) are fully applicable. The purported criminal conduct 
occurred in 2013 while Applicant was going through a contested divorce. He 
demonstrated that such conduct occurred under “such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur.” The charges were subsequently dismissed and Applicant is 
attempting to have the charges expunged from his record. AG ¶¶ 31(b) and (c) are not 
relevant. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the whole-person concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
The rationale for continuing Applicant’s clearance is more substantial than the 
reasons for denying his clearance. Applicant is a 35-year-old cost analyst, who has 
been working in the defense industry since 2008. In 2004, Appellant married, and in 
2014, he divorced. He provides child support for his two children and remains involved 
in their lives. Appellant’s former co-workers share a high opinion of him and 
recommend him for a security clearance.  
  
 Appellant acted responsibly under the circumstances when all of his delinquent 
nonpriority, unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code. He has received a fresh financial start. He is motivated to continue his career 
as a defense contractor. He understands that he needs to pay his debts, and the 
conduct required to retain his security clearance.  
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.n: For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:               FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.d:           For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
