 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00063 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence) were alleged in the SOR, but Department Counsel withdrew the 
Guideline B allegations after Applicant answered the SOR. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 31, 2013. 
On September 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines B, F, and E. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix 
H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 1, 2015; and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on January 11, 2016. On the same day, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. The 
FORM consisted of the SOR (Item 1), Applicant’s SCA (Item 2), a summary of an 
interview by a security investigator during the background investigation (Item 3), and 
two credit bureau reports (CBRs) from April 2013 and June 2015 (Items 4 and 5).1 He 
received the FORM on February 3, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on October 19, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR is ambiguous. Regarding the Guideline F 
allegations, he stated,  
 
I was not aware of these delinquencies. I plead guilty. . . . Two months 
ago I was interviewed by [a security officer]. I asked [the security officer] to 
check my credit report and he said it was fine with a score of 650. 
Recently I checked my credit report and it is as you say. I do not 
understand it and am looking into it. I paid them all off. 
 
Regarding the Guideline E allegation, he stated, “Guilty, as stated above.” I have 
interpreted his answer to say that he paid the debts and was not aware that they were 
listed in his CBRs as delinquent. I have treated his answers to the SOR as denials.  
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a federal contactor supporting another 
government agency (AGA). He has worked for federal contractors supporting the AGA 
since August 2003 and has held a security clearance issued by the AGA since March 
2008. 
 
 Applicant married in August 1979 and divorced in August 2003. He married his 
current spouse in June 2009. He has no children. He received an associate’s degree 
from a community college in June 2005. 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3 was not authenticated as required by the Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Thus, it is not admissible 
absent a knowing waiver of the authentication requirement. A pro se Applicant’s failure to object to an 
unauthenticated personal subject interview is not tantamount to waiver of the authentication requirement. 
Waiver means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right 
and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
Applicant was not advised of the authentication requirement or his right to object to Item 3. I have not 
considered Item 3 for any purpose. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a credit card account that was referred for collection of 
$10,911 in June 2012, when payments were 150 days past due. It is reflected in 
Applicant’s April 2013 and June 2015 CBRs. The June 2015 CBR reflects that the last 
payment on the account was in March 2014. The amount of the payment is not 
reflected. The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a credit card account that was referred for collection of $8,806 
in June 2012, when payments were 150 days past due. It is reflected in both of 
Applicant’s CBRs. The June 2015 CBR reflects that the last payment on the account 
was in July 2014. The amount of the payment is not reflected. The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a credit card account that was referred for collection of $7,444 
in June 2012. Applicant is listed as an authorized user of the credit card in both of the 
CBRs.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “no” to questions whether, 
during the past seven years, he had defaulted on any type of loan or had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency, and whether he was currently 120 days delinquent 
on any debt. He did not disclose the debts alleged in the SOR and reflected in the 
CBRs. In his responses to the SOR and the FORM, he did not submit any 
documentation that the debts have been paid, compromised, forgiven, disputed, or 
otherwise resolved. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
 4
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
 
 5
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his CBRs establish the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. His CBRs reflect that he was an authorized user on the credit card alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.c and not legally liable for the debt. Thus, SOR ¶ 1.c is not established by the 
evidence. However, the evidence establishing SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b is sufficient to 
establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are established. The debts are arguably 
“infrequent,” but they are recent. Applicant has provided no information about the 
circumstances in which the debts were incurred. He has submitted no evidence of 
financial counseling and no evidence that the debts were paid or otherwise resolved. He 
has not disputed any of the alleged debts. 
 
 
 6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a):“deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of 
education are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant’s CBRs reflect that he made a payment of an unknown amount on the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in March 2014, a year after he submitted his SCA, and he 
made a payment of an unknown amount on the debt alleged in SOR 1.b in July 2014. 
The amounts alleged in the SOR reflect the balance due on the accounts after the 
payments. 
 
 The fact that Applicant made payments on the debts after submitting his SCA 
contradicts his claim that he thought the debts were paid off when he submitted it. The 
amounts of the debts, the lengthy period during which the delinquent accounts were 
unresolved, and his implausible and unconvincing explanation for not disclosing the 
debts in his SCA indicate an intentional falsification. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 
16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 7
 Neither mitigating condition is established. There is no evidence that Applicant 
attempted to correct his SCA before receiving the SOR. His falsification was not minor, 
because falsification of a security clearance application “strikes at the heart of the 
security clearance process.” ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App.Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) It was 
recent and did not happen under unique circumstances. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts and 
falsification of his SCA. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 8
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
