 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02509 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 23, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) and it was mailed to Applicant. It was received on March 11, 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days from receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not object to the Government's evidence, which is identified as Items 1 through 5. 
Applicant provided documents that are marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E.1 
The Government and Applicant’s documents are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on September 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny the allegations in the SOR, but rather provided 
explanations. I have assumed he denied all allegations. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He is a high school graduate and served in the military 
from 1990 to 1996 when he was honorably discharged. He has been consistently 
employed by the same federal contractor since 2008.2 
 
Applicant married in 2001. He has a 15-year-old daughter from the marriage. On 
his August 2014 security clearance application (SCA), he lists he has a stepdaughter 
who is 20 years old. He does not list any other stepchildren. Applicant attributes his 
financial problems to medical expenses incurred in 2009 for mental health issues 
associated with a stepson.3 
 
Credit Reports from September 2014 and November 2015 support the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR.4  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in October 2014. During 
the interview, he acknowledged that he was unable to pay the account in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($8,356), which was for a personal loan for home improvements and his spouse’s 
medical bills. He explained to the investigator that he was going to refinance his home 
mortgage to pay this bill, but his wife was going to receive an inheritance, so they were 
waiting to see how much she would inherit before paying the debt. In his response to 
the FORM, Applicant indicated he received an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form 
1099-C, cancellation of debt for tax year 2014 for this debt. He indicated he filed it with 
his federal income tax returns.5 
 
 On his SCA, Applicant disclosed a collection account (SOR ¶1.a - $10,087) for a 
voluntarily repossessed vehicle from 2009. During his background interview, Applicant 
explained that he intended to pay this account by refinancing his home mortgage or 
                                                          
1 AE D are copies of the documents the Government provided to Applicant. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 2, 3: Answer to the SOR.  
 
4 Items 4 and 5. 
 
5 Items 2, 3; AE A, C.  
 
3 
 
 
through his wife’s prospective inheritance. The investigator provided Applicant with the 
name of the new collection agency that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The collection agency 
is also listed in the credit reports from September 2014 and December 2015, which 
were provided to him by the Government. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated 
he could not find information about this account through the credit report that he 
retrieved so he could reach a settlement agreement. This is the same collection agency 
that the investigator provided to him.6  
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that this debt and the other 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.c, did not appear on the credit report he retrieved. 
He then retrieved another credit report, and it was listed on the new one. In his April 
2016 response to the FORM, he stated that he sent a letter to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a 
asking it to validate the debt. He admitted that this is the debt for the repossessed 
vehicle. The credit bureau reports reflect that the debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are 
duplicates. The most recent credit report provided by Applicant lists the name of creditor 
that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.7 I find in favor of Applicant with regards to the duplicate 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant has not resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a.   
 
 The delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($35) is for medical services. The account was 
reported as delinquent in December 2010. He paid this debt in February 2016 and 
provided documentation.8 
 
Applicant did not provide any other detailed information about what actions he 
took to resolve any of the alleged debts before he completed his August 2014 SCA, 
after his October 2014 interview with a government investigator, or before receiving the 
2015 SOR. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that after his financial difficulties in 
2009, he has established a pattern of timely payments for his expenses and has worked 
to increase his credit score through proper financial management. He further stated that 
he had difficulty determining the correct creditors because they were not listed on the 
credit report he obtained.9  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
7 Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
8 Items 3, 4, 5; AE A, B. 
 
9 Item 1, 2, 3. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant experienced financial difficulties in 2009, which resulted in delinquent 
debts. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he had delinquent debts due to financial problems in 
2009. He did not provide sufficient evidence to show he actively addressed the debts 
alleged in the SOR. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was resolved when the IRS issued him a 
cancelation of debt form. He has not resolved the vehicle repossession debt despite 
being aware of it since he returned the vehicle, or was advised it was a security concern 
in 2014. He did not pay the small medical debt until March 2016. Applicant provided 
limited specific financial information. His failure to timely address his delinquent debts 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant indicated that his financial difficulties were due to medical expenses 
from 2009 incurred for a stepson. This was a condition beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not provide evidence of any action he may have taken 
from 2009 to 2014 to repay his delinquent debts. He was interviewed in 2014 and 
confronted with the delinquent debts. He told the investigator he was going to refinance 
his house or use a prospective inheritance to pay the debts in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.c. In 
2014, the IRS issued him a tax form that canceled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c and 
presumably he filed the form with his federal tax returns. He did not provide evidence of 
any action he may have taken to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant was also 
made aware of a small medical debt, but did not resolve it until March 2016. Applicant 
did not act responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. In his answer to the 
SOR and response to the FORM, he stated he is in a better financial position. However, 
the large debt owed for the repossessed vehicle is not resolved. At this juncture, I 
cannot find that there are clear indications the problem is being resolved. Although the 
delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is resolved through an IRS cancelation of debt, I cannot 
find that this constitutes a good-faith effort to repay the overdue creditor. Applicant was 
made aware of the small medical debt during his background interview in October 2014. 
He did not take action to resolve it until March 2016. This also does not constitute a 
good-faith effort to repay his creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant 
provided sufficient evidence to conclude the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a duplicate. AG ¶ 
20(e) applies to this debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2008. He 
experienced financial difficulties in 2009. In 2014, he was made aware that his 
delinquent debts were a security concern, and he indicated he intended to repay the 
debts. He acknowledged his financial responsibility regarding the debt associated with 
the repossessed vehicle, yet he has taken minimal action to resolve it. He received a 
cancelation of debt tax form for the other large debt. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence to conclude he has a reliable financial track record. Applicant has failed to 
meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:  For Applicant 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
