 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07969 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 7, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 10, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for July 20, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant’s objection to GE 7 was sustained. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted 
documents that were marked AE F through K and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since February 2014. He is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. He is a high school graduate. He has never married, but he has lived with 
his fiancée since 2004. He has two children with his fiancée and an older child from a 
different relationship. He and his fiancée also have a foster child in their care.1 
 
 Applicant was injured at work in 2010, resulting in several surgeries. He sued his 
employer. He fell behind on his bills while he was off work pending the lawsuit. His 
share of the settlement received in 2012 was about $330,000. He did not pay his debts 
with the settlement. He used the money to take several vacations, including a trip to a 
foreign country; he bought a $60,000 sports car; and his family ate out a lot. He also 
opened a small business that was unsuccessful. He closed the business in 2013. He 
sold the sports car for $50,000.2 
 
 Applicant did not file his federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2013 
when they were due. He retained a tax professional to prepare his returns, and the 
returns were filed in July 2016. The returns indicate that Applicant was due a $4,744 
refund from the IRS and $8 from the state.3 
 
 The SOR alleges a delinquent mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.c), 28 miscellaneous 
delinquent debts, and that Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax 
returns for tax year 2013 when they were due (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). However, the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.aa are duplicates. Applicant established that he has 
been current on his mortgage loan since February 2015. He admitted owing all of the 
remaining debts with the exception of the $134 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s. That debt is 
listed on an October 2015 Equifax credit report.4 
 
 With the exception of the mortgage loan, Applicant has not paid any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. He stated that he put it in “the back of [his] head,” and that if he 
“didn’t think about them then [he] wouldn’t have to take care of them.”5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 30-32; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-27, 33-39, 56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-28, 42-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE C. 
 
4 Tr. at 24, 50-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 27, 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in June 2016. The $134 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s is not included in the bankruptcy petition, most likely because he 
did not acknowledge it was his debt, and it was not listed on the credit report that his 
attorney used to prepare the petition. Applicant made the first payment under the 
proposed bankruptcy plan in July 2016. Subsequent payments are being garnished 
directly from his paycheck. He received financial counseling as a requirement of the 
bankruptcy court.6 
 
 Applicant stated how much he appreciates his job and working with the military. 
He stated that he has learned from his mistakes and that he intends to complete the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan.7 
 
Applicant submitted letters attesting to his excellent job performance. He is 
praised for his moral character, work ethic, responsibility, trustworthiness, dependability, 
professionalism, dedication, loyalty, patriotism, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
6 Tr. at 27, 46-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4-6; AE D, E, I, J. 
 
7 Tr. at 29, 48-49, 63; AE A-D, K. 
8 AE B, F-H. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. He did not file his federal and state income tax returns for tax year 
2013 when they were due. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.aa are duplicates. When the same conduct is alleged twice in 
the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicate allegations should be resolved 
in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) (same 
debt alleged twice). SOR ¶ 1.aa is concluded for Applicant. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant has been current on his mortgage loan since February 2015. SOR ¶ 
1.c is concluded for Applicant. I have doubts about the validity of the $134 debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.s. That allegation is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s work injury in 2010 was beyond his control. However, he received 
about $330,000 from his settlement in 2012. He went on several vacations and bought a 
$60,000 sports car. Except for his mortgage payments, he did nothing to pay his debts 
until he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in June 2016. He filed his 2013 federal and 
state income tax returns in July 2016. He stated that he has learned from his mistakes 
and that he intends to complete the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. The Appeal Board has 
held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record 
of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 
2009)).  
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) are not applicable. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) 
(financial counseling) is applicable; the second part (clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control) is not applicable, except as it relates to Applicant’s 
tax returns. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
 
 
  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. However, his recent steps to address his financial issues are 
insufficient to mitigate his questionable decisions.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t-1.z:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.aa:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.bb-1.ee:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
