                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 15-02415
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
 
History of the Case
On October 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 13, 2015, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 14, 2016, and responded to the FORM
within the time permitted with documentation of payments to creditors 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e,
and 1.f. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as Items 8-16. The case was assigned
to me on April 22, 2016.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accrued (a) a judgment against him in
November 2011 that remains unpaid and (b) accumulated five delinquent debts
exceeding $17,000. Allegedly, each of the listed delinquent debts remains outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations and attached
documentation of payments he claimed were made to five of the creditors and the
release of the judgment covered by subparagraph 1.c. He provided no further
explanations of his payments or how the payments are related to the specific debts
listed in the SOR.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 56-year-old electronics technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in May 1986 and has no children from this marriage. (Item 3)
He earned an associate’s degree in May 1981 and claims no military service. (Items 3
and 5) 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since April 2006 as an electronics
technician. Previously, he was employed by other defense contractors as an electronics
technician.
Finances
Between 2010 and 2012, Applicant and his wife encountered financial difficulties
in keeping up with their bills. (Items 5 and 8). Applicant attributed his financial problems
to overspending, bad decisions, and providing financial assistance to his parents.
(Items 5 and 8) 
In August 2010, Applicant and his wife collectively decided to enlist the
assistance of a debt consolidation service. (Items 5 and 8) Between September 2010
and 2015, they remitted $1,450 a month to the debt consolidation firm. Records
document that the firm was successful during this time in negotiating payment
3
reductions with many of his scheduled creditors, but not with creditor 1.c who obtained
a judgment in November 2011 for $12,301. (Items 2 and 5) 
Garnishment proceedings were started by creditor 1.c but suspended after
Applicant remitted two payments of $56 each and committed to meeting his monthly
payment obligations. Applicant documented creditor 1.c’s release of judgment in April
2015 following an acknowledged settlement of the judgment debt. (Item 2) This
judgment did not include settlement of the listed 1.a debt. The creditor 1.c debt covered
by the judgment has an assigned account number ending in a number that differs from
the one covering the listed creditor 1.a debt for $5,876. (Item 7) 
Afforded an opportunity to respond to the FORM, Applicant documented his
settlement of the creditor 1.a debt as well with a confirming letter from the creditor in
February 2016 acknowledging its receipt of Applicant’s $1,400 payment in April 2015
and informing Applicant that the debt was settled in full for less than the full balance.
(Item 16)
Applicant’s remaining delinquent debts are comprised of the following: a
charged- off debt to creditor 1.b ($5,374); a debt placed in collection with creditor 1.d
($89); a charged-off debt with creditor 1.e ($1,361); and a charged off debt with creditor
1.f ($5,020). Documented settlements of each of these debts have been supplied by
Applicant with his post-FORM submissions. Applicant’s creditor 1.b debt was
discharged in October 2015 with a $2,600 settlement payment. (Item 13) The balance
of the debt was cancelled by creditor 1.b, who issued a 1099-C cancellation of debt
notice. (Item 14) Applicant also documented his payment of the creditor 1.d debt and
received a confirmation of payment in January 2015. (Item 15) 
Further, Applicant documented his satisfaction of the creditor 1.e debt with an
accepted payment ($844) for less than the amount due in March 2012. (Item 12) And
he documented his satisfaction of a reported account with a listed account number that
differs from the other accounts identified with the same creditor in Applicant’s provided
pleading attachment and credit reports. (Items 2, 6-7) So, too, the creditor 1.d account
number differs from the debt with the account number supplied by Applicant and cannot
be reconciled. (Items 2 and 5) 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant claimed that his creditor 1.e account was
transferred to another collection agency. This pleading claim could not be initially
verified by any of the credit reports or furnished attachments. The listed debt amount of
$1,361 for the creditor 1.e debt varied considerably from the $1,431 claimed amount
owing on the attached debt settlement summary provided by Applicant as an
attachment to his SOR response. (Item 2) With his post-FORM submissions, he was
able to clear up this inconsistency with a documented settlement in full of the debt with
an accepted payment ($844) for less than the amount due in 2015. (Item 12) 
Finally, with his post-FORM submissions, Applicant was able to document his
satisfaction of his creditor 1.f debt with an accepted payment of $1,755 in full settlement
4
of the debt. (Item 11) With the settlement of his creditor 1.f debt, Applicant is credited
with resolving all of his listed debts in the SOR. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
5
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed electronics technician for a defense contractor
who incurred a judgment debt of $12,301 and five delinquent consumer debts
exceeding $17,000 over a five-year period spanning 2010 and 2015. Applicant’s
collective accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply
to Applicant’s situation.
                                        
6
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Inferentially, Applicant’s delinquent debts are attributable for the most part to
his acknowledged overspending, bad decisions, and providing financial assistance to
his parents.  Based on the documented materials furnished by Applicant in his FORM
response and his post-FORM submissions, some extenuating circumstances are
associated with Applicant’s furnished financial assistance to his parents. Partially
available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Applicant has since resolved all of his debts with his listed creditors with
settlement acceptances. Each of the entered settlements are documented in
Applicant’s attachments and his post-FORM submissions. Applicant resolved his debt
delinquencies without any documented financial counseling assistance.  MC ¶ 20(d),
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” is fully applicable to Applicant’s situation.
Whole-person assessment enables Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent consumer debts (including the
creditor 1.c debt reduced to judgment). His resolving his debts through negotiated
settlements reflects positively on his renewed commitments to paying his debts.
Resolution of his listed delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining
control of his finances. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s accrual of delinquent debts and his recent success in resolving his debts
with negotiated settlements, Applicant mitigated financial concerns. Favorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.f.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.f:                For Applicant
7
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
