                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  15-01014           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Todd M. Hinnen, Esq.  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate personal conduct concerns.  Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On September 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 7, 2015, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on April
27, 2016. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-5).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and three exhibits (AEs A-C). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on May 10, 2016.
Procedural Issues
Applicant interposed objections to the admission of GEs 2-5 on grounds they
represented pleadings and responses in a lawsuit that was settled without any of the
parties admitting wrongdoing. The Government cited to a number of allegations in the
global civil complaint filed in federal court in August 2010 that Applicant admitted.
Considering all of the facts and arguments of the parties, GEs 2-5 were admitted
conditionally for the limited purpose of considering fact admissions to allegations in the
complaint. (Tr. 25-27) Applicant’s objection to the admission of GE 6 on grounds of
hearsay of a trade publication was sustained.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly was a named defendant in a civil complaint
filed against himself, his father, his father’s company (Company A), and several others in
August 2010 by a corporate competitor (Company B) alleging a multi-year scheme of
fraud and industrial espionage. Allegedly, by operating as a representative of a shell
company (Company C), Applicant obtained Company B software for other Company A
employees who used it to create programs designed to enable Company B customers to
export data of Company B software to make Company A more competitive. Allegedly, the
parties reached a settlement in February 2011 that included a condition that Company A
pay Company B a lump sum of $11 million in damages and remove all Company B
import/export features of Company A software.
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified material facts in his electronic
questionnaires for investigations processing (e-QIP) of April 1, 2014 when responding to
question 28 by answering “no” to the question of whether he was a party to any public
record civil complaint not listed elsewhere in the e-QIP.  
In his response to the allegations of subparagraph 1.a of the SOR, Applicant
admitted some of the allegations. More specifically, he admitted Company B’s filing a
complaint in federal court in August 2010 and reaching a settlement with the named
defendants in February 2011 that consisted of a payment by Company A to Company B
in the amount of $11 million and the removal and return by Company A of all Company B
property. Applicant denied the remaining allegations covered by subparagraph 1.a.
Responding to subparagraph 1.b of Guideline E, Applicant admitted his failure to
disclose the civil complaint filed against him by Company B in the e-QIP he completed in
April 2014. But he denied any deliberate omission and claimed his omission of the
Company B lawsuit was the result of a mistake, not falsification. He claimed the lawsuit
was concluded more than three years prior to his completing his e-QIP and his erroneous
3
omission was an isolated incident on the form that was otherwise thorough and accurate
in all other respects.
Findings of Fact       
Applicant is a 34-year-old director of business development for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR were
denied by Applicant and placed in issue.  Findings follow.
Background
Applicant immigrated to the United States in February 1994 as an Indian citizen
and recent refugee from Nigeria. (GE 1; Tr. 35), and he became a naturalized U.S. citizen
in November 2010. (GE 1) He married in March 2011 and reported no divorce or formal
separation from his spouse. Since January 2012, he has resided with his parents, and the
status of his marriage is unclear. (GE 1) Applicant has no reported children from his
marriage. (GE 1)
Applicant earned a bachelor of science degree in engineering in May 2003 and a
master of science degree in June 2004 from recognized U.S. universities. (GE 1) He
claimed no military service or legal training. (GE 1; Tr. 50-51) 
Applicant has worked for his current employer (Company A) since March 2006 as
a director of business development. (GEs 1-2 and 5; Tr. 32, 40) Between January 2004
and March 2006, he worked as a vice president of business development for another firm.
(GE 1) Applicant has held a security clearance since 2008 with DOD (upgraded to top
secret according to Applicant) and a separate clearance since 2009 with an intelligence
agency. (Tr. 36) He is familiar with the importance of providing the information requested
in security clearance applications. (GE 1; Tr. 35)
Applicant’s Software Licensing  Initiatives
Company B is a software competitor of Company A that similarly develops analysis
software that it sold to the intelligence, defense, and law enforcement communities. (GEs
2 and 5) Company A’s marketing materials promote its software as a program generated
from the start-up’s developed methodology for combating fraud. (GEs 2 and 5) Shortly
after joining Company A, Applicant contacted Company B about purchasing Company B
products for Company C and furnished Company B his personal email address. (GEs 2,
5; Tr. 43-44) Applicant, in turn, purchased software from Company B using his father’s
credit card under the guise of purchasing the software for his father’s company (Company
C). (Tr. 45-46) Because he did not want Company B (an active competitor) to know he
worked for Company A, he did not give Company B his business address at Company A.
(Tr. 45) 
Applicant was an employee of Company C between 2004 and 2009. He is no
longer associated with the company. Company C is a company set up by Applicant’s
4
father prior to 2004. Applicant was interested in Company B products that could be used
for commercial fraud purposes. (GEs 2 and 5; Tr. 45-46)
In April 2006, Applicant, operating through Company C, purchased a proprietary
software development kit and related technical support from Company B. At the time of
the purchase, Applicant was Company A’s director of business development and also an
employee of Company C. (GEs 2 and 5 an AE A) When Company B asked for more
information about Company C, Applicant furnished Company C’s registered address in
another state. (GEs 2 and 5) The proprietary software purchased from Company B
offered Company A’s customers a way to import the customers’ data into Company A’s
products. Applicant used his father’s credit card to pay for the licensing of Company B’s
software.
Company A is a software developer that sells certain of its analysis software to
intelligence, defense, and law enforcement agencies, and assists these departments and
agencies in their missions of solving counter terrorism problems. (Tr. 34-35) Company A
clients include both private commercial companies and Government departments and
agencies (approximately 90% commercial-related and roughly 10% Government-related).
(Tr. 33-34, 39) The software employed by Company A is designed to facilitate the easy
integration of disparate silos of data, whether globally or domestically situated. (Tr. 34) 
In its business pursuits, Company A competes directly with Company B with
respect to the sale of certain products. (GEs 2 and 5; Tr. 33)  Applicant’s father was a
managing partner of Company C prior to August 2010, and his brother worked for
Company C as a summer intern providing engineering input and is a member of
Company C. (GEs 2 and 5) 
While employed by Company A, Applicant registered for and attended a portion of
a Company B user conference.  (GEs 2 and 5) During his attendance at this conference,
in or around May 2006, he provided his home address and mobile phone number, and
identified his company as Company C. 
In January 2007, Company B sold Applicant’s father and Company C a license to
Company’s B’s X designer software, along with one year of technical support. (GE 5; Tr.
46) In August 2007, Applicant contacted Company B and requested by email that certain
software items be consolidated, and used his father’s name as the requester. (GEs 2 and
5) Between January 2007 and August 2010, Applicant continued to acquire Company B
software for Company A’s business use, using his father and his Company C firm as the
purchasing agent.  
In August 2010, Company B filed a civil complaint in federal court against
Companies A and C and named Applicant, his father, and other interested parties in the
suit. (GE 2) In its complaint, Company B alleged a multiple scheme of fraudulent
industrial espionage and broke its claims down into counts of contract and copyright
breach, fraudulent conspiracy, misappropriation of trade secrets, and civil claims covered
by the federal statute (18 U.S.C. § 1962(c), entitled the Racketeer Influence and Corrupt
5
Practices Act (RICO). (GE 2) Applicant and the other named defendants answered the
complaint individually between August 2010 and October 2010. (GEs 3-5) Whether the
parties engaged in any discovery before settling their lawsuit is unknown. Because
Applicant and the other defendants denied most of the charging allegations, little of the
specifics is known about the respective roles played by the individual defendants in the
alleged multi-year fraud scheme directed at Company B.
Summarized, Applicant worked with his father and others at Company A in
establishing Company C in early 2006 as an instrument of Company A. The founders
designed Company C for the purpose of contacting and arranging for the licensing of
proprietary intelligence analysis software and technical support for the use and licensing
by Company A (a competitor of Company B) to its own employees and for re-licensing to
customers of Company B. Applicant’s designated role was to contact Company B and
arrange for the purchase of its proprietary software and technical support without
disclosing Company A’s close relationship with Company C. (Tr. 43-45) These inter-
relationships are well supported by the pleadings and evidence in the record.
At the time of Company C’s acquired licensing of Company B’s software in March
2006, Company A and Company C had interlocking directors and operated as a single
entity when contracting with Company B for its proprietary software. Applicant as a
director of both Company A and Company C was instrumental in making contact with
Company B and arranging for the licensing of Company B’s software without identifying
his own relationship with Company A and his family’s controlling interests in both
companies.
In February 2011, Company A and Company C settled their lawsuit with Company
B. Their settlement resolved multiple claims and counterclaims between the parties. (GEs
2 and 5; Tr. 49) More specifically, the parties’ settlement resolved Company B’s multiple
claims against Company A and Company C for, inter alia, breach of contract and
copyright, misappropriation of trade secrets included in Company B’s proprietary
software, and engagement in industrial espionage. Under the terms of the parties’
settlement, Company A paid Company B the sum of $11 million in damages and removed
all import features of Company B’s software.  
Although the evidence is lacking in proving any misappropriation of Company B’s
proprietary software by Company A, or any of its corporate or individual agents and
affiliates, inferences are warranted that Applicant played a major role in the contacting
and arranging for Company A’s licensing of Company B’s proprietary software through
Company C without disclosing the close relationships he and Company C shared  with
Company A, a direct competitor of Company B and an unlikely partner with Company A
on any mutual software licensing agreement.  
Applicant characterized his actions in arranging the purchase of Company B
proprietary software as a youthful mistake. (GE 5; Tr. 44) His admitted actions, while not
fully developed, do not reflect youthful mistakes by a 24-year-old, highly educated
engineer. To the contrary, his actions represent concerted attempts to obtain software
6
and technical support by surreptitious means that he knew at the time was wrong. (Tr. 41,
48-49) By holding himself out as a representative of Company C in purchasing Company
B’s software, he concealed his role as a director of Company A, the real party in interest
in buying Company B’s software and technical support. 
Applicant claimed his noble goals of saving lives by merging Company B’s
software with Company’s A’s to create the desired effect of information inseparability.  He
considered these goals to be justification enough for utilizing fraudulent means to acquire
Company B’s software. With this justification for moving forward, he elevated important
security ends over lawful means to complete his purchases. Noble or not in his overall
thinking, Applicant’s actions were undertaken with the intent to mislead and defraud
Company B into releasing its proprietary software and were undertaken dishonestly for
self-serving purposes.  He offered no good reasons that he could not have used lawful
business practices to obtain needed software from Company B.
Applicant’s E-QIP Omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in April 2014, Applicant omitted his being named as a
party in a Company B lawsuit filed in 2010, along with, inter alia, Companies A and C.
(GE 1) Applicant denied any deliberate omission of the lawsuit and claimed his omission
was the result of a mistake of what he characterized as a minor omission of a major
lawsuit. (GE1; Tr. 37-38) To be weighed in determining whether Applicant’s denial is
credible are his educational background; his deep knowledge of information technology
systems and their proprietary features that offer interoperability opportunities; his
extensive experience in the marketing of intelligence-related software world-wide; and his
familiarity with the issues and importance of the Company B lawsuit. 
In answering his 2014 e-QIP, Applicant claimed to mistakenly contextualize the
section 28 question differently, interpreting the question to encompass the named
companies (i.e., Companies A-C) in the lawsuit, and not the named individuals like
Applicant. (Tr. 37, 41) The question inquiring about prior lawsuits in which Applicant was
a named party is straightforward and asks specific information about being named in a
lawsuit that he answered in 2010.  
Motivation for his omitting the lawsuit information in his e-QIP was considerable
given his recent history of intentionally withholding his real interests from Company B to
maximize his chances of his completing software purchases with Company B. Applicant’s
e-QIP omission reflects some pattern of according a higher priority to his personal
interests when faced with conflicting choices of withholding and disclosure.
Applicant was apparently never interviewed by an agent of the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) following his submission of his e-QIP.  Claiming his first opportunity
to review allegations of falsification of his e-QIP came after he received the SOR in
September 2015, he admitted the lawsuit in his SOR response. Applicant’s claims cannot
be easily reconciled, though, with his statement that he believed the lawsuit was of a
commercial nature that primarily concerned Companies A and B. The question asked of
7
him was neither complicated nor ambiguous, and he was well aware at the time he
answered the question that he was a named party to the lawsuit filed by Company B and
filed a detailed answer to the complaint through his retained attorneys.  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s omission of the 2010
Company B civil lawsuit naming him, along with his company and family affiliations, his
falsification denials cannot be reconciled with his e-QIP omission. Applicant is highly
educated in the field of engineering, is well-traveled in marketing his company’s software
(GE 1), and has considerable familiarity with not only the technical features of intelligence
software, but the demanding disclosure requirements imposed on applicants who apply
for a security clearance. Without more direct evidence of Applicant’s intentions when
answering section 28 of the e-QIP he was asked to complete, drawn inferences of
knowing and wilful omission cannot be averted. 
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by Company A’s president (President X). (AE C) In his
declaration of March 2016, President X confirmed his overall responsibility for the security
of classified information held by Company A and for building the back-end software layer
that powers Company A’s government platform. He confirmed his working relationship
with Applicant since early 2006 and offered praise for Applicant’s conscientious work in
behalf of their Government counterparts. (AE C) 
President X recited his facility clearance officer (FSO) role at Company A when
applicant applied for and received his original security clearance and subsequent
additional eligibility levels. (AE C) Based on his work with Applicant over a number of
years, President X characterized Applicant as reliable, trustworthy, and serious about
protecting the information that he and Company A were entrusted with. (AE C) He made
no mention, however, of his familiarity with the Company B lawsuit or Applicant’s
involvement in Company B’s software program. (AE C)
Consultants who worked with Applicant while tasked to provide security assistance
to Company A expressed praise for his joint efforts in securing a facility clearance for the
firm in 2007 and in building Company A’s security program. (AE A) Consultant K credited
Applicant with displaying the highest moral and ethical characteristics for others to emulate
and with showing the utmost respect for the Government and the sensitive information
with which he is entrusted. (AE A) Consultant K expressed no familiarity with the Company
B lawsuit or any Applicant involvement in Company B’s software program. (AE A)
Co-workers with strong military backgrounds who have worked closely with
Applicant extolled his exhibited dedication to U.S. security interests and unquestioned
loyalty and trust. (AE B) Co-worker P cited his observations of Applicant’s implementation
of plans, procedures, and training to ensure the company was in compliance with
Government guidance on classified material. Co-worker P always found Applicant to be
completely reliable and trustworthy “as much as anyone I went to combat with.” (AE B) His
8
co-workers expressed no familiarity with the Company B lawsuit or any Applicant
involvement in Company B’s software program.  (AE B)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  Each of these conditions must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context
of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during
the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance
process.  AG, ¶ 15.
9
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s active role in the purchasing of
proprietary software on behalf of a company controlled by the competitor of the firm he
was actively seeking to acquire sensitive proprietary software from. This seller later filed
a lawsuit naming Applicant, his companies, and others in a conspiracy to
misappropriate the licensing company’s copyrights and trade secrets. 
Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s material omission of the
Company B lawsuit in the e-QIP he completed in April 2014. His claims of mistake in his
omission of the lawsuit are not supported by evidence of a good-faith misreading of the
plain language of the section 28 inquiry contained in applicant’s e-QIP.
10
Proprietary Software Misappropriation  Concerns 
Historically, settlements of civil lawsuits are not admitted to prove facts alleged in
the pleadings, and which are not proven by competent and admissible evidence. See
United States v. Bailey, 696 F.3d 794, 801 (9  Cir. 2012).  Settlement agreements areth
barred from admission to prove the validity or validating of a claim or its amount. See
Rule 408 of Fed. R. Evid. However, Rule 408 does not preclude the admission of facts
covered in settlement agreements or elsewhere in the record. Pleading admissions
unrelated to settlement discussions or agreements fall with the Rule’s exceptions
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his relationships with Companies
A and C, his role in contacting and arranging for purchases of Company B’s proprietary
software on multiple occasions between 2006 and 2010, and his approval of the
ensuing Company A settlement of the Company B lawsuit that included a Company A
payment of $11 million in damages to Company B and removal of Company B’s
software from Company A’s software programs are well-established and negate the
need for any independent proof. See McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006).
Because Applicant’s pleading admissions did not include details of his purchases
and uses of Company B software as an undisclosed intermediary for Company A in
arranging for the purchases of Company B software, additional evidence was needed to
tie-in Applicant to Company B’s multiple claims of fraud, contractual breaches,
misappropriation of Company B trade secrets, copyright infringement, and civil RICO
violations. Applicant supplied that missing information at hearing with his own testimony
at hearing. 
Applicant’s admissions include acknowledgments of his (a) surreptitious use of
Company C for purchases of Company B proprietary software to conceal his
connections with Company A, the real party in interest and close competitor of
Company B, (b) his use of his father’s credit card to complete his Company B software
purchases, and (c) his naming as a material defendant in the Company B lawsuit, and
(d) his approval of the Company A and Company C settlement with Company B.
Applicant’s pleading and evidentiary admissions when considered in their entirety reflect
dishonest conduct and serious judgment lapses that cast doubt on Applicant’s
worthiness to hold a security clearance.
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances presented in the record,
inclusive of Applicant’s admissions, the SOR allegations that attribute wrongful
participation by Applicant and others in a multi-year scheme of fraud and industrial
espionage by operating as a representative of a shell company (Company C) to obtain
software from Company B for other Company A employees and Company B customers
are well demonstrated. Pleading and evidentiary admissions support drawn inferences
that Applicant and other Company A employees incorporated Company B’s proprietary
11
software in Company A’s platform to achieve the desired interoperability to maximize
the data Company A supplied its government customers.
Based on the foregoing findings and conclusions, DC ¶ 16(d), “credible adverse
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be
sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality,
release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
protected information; 
(2) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or
resources. . . .”
While the evidence is less than clear how much Applicant’s role in misusing
Company A’s resources to acquire Company B software by surreptitious means and
pass it on to both Company B’s customers and Company A’s employees and customers
by fraud and concealment, his contributions to Company A’s illicit software acquisitions
from Company B were considerable and reflect a material role in Company A’s
fraudulent scheme in acquiring Company B’s proprietary software over an extended
period of years.  
Mitigation is lacking in Applicant’s proofs. His characterizing his actions as
youthful mistakes are unconvincing when evaluating his claims against his record of
superior educational achievements with respected universities and his years of working
with sophisticated software and technical services. (GE 1) Not only are his  misleading
enticements with Company B highly material to an overall trustworthiness assessment,
but his indiscretions reflect still recent pattern acts of dishonesty that pose risks of
recurrence. Positive steps to reduce or eliminate risks of recurrence are not in evidence.
Considering all of the evidence presented, mitigating conditions are not available to
Applicant. 
 
e-QIP Omission Concerns 
In the process of completing an e-QIP in April 2014, Applicant failed to disclose
his being named as a defendant in a suit filed by Company B in 2010. Applicant’s claims
and explanations about his mistaken interpretation of the question covered by section
12
28 of his e-QIP are not credible. Both motive and past history of withholding his
Company A business relationship when dealing with Company B provide ample reasons
for his intentionally withholding disclosure of the Company B lawsuit in his e-QIP.
Considered together under all of the facts and circumstances presented, Applicant’s
lawsuit omission reflects knowing and wilful conduct that raises security additional
concerns under Guideline E.
One of the disqualifying conditions covered by Guideline E are applicable.  DC ¶
16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts to any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.” DC ¶ 16(a) may be considered in evaluating Applicant’s e-QIP
omission of Company B’s 2010 civil lawsuit filed against himself, Companies A and C,
and other family members and associates.
Traditional assessments of falsification in ISCR proceedings include
considerations of motive in determining whether particular applicants engaged in
knowing and willful concealment. Both Guideline E and relevant case authorities
underscore the importance of motive and subjective intent considerations in gauging
knowing and willful behavior. See ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6,
2006)(citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See,  generally, United
States v. Chapin, 515 F.2d 1274, 1283-84 (D.C. Cir. 1975); United States v. Steinhilber,
484 F.2d 386, 389-90 (8  Cir. 1973); United States v. Diogo, 320 F.2d 898, 905 (2d Cir.th
1963). Put differently, the Government must be able to negate any reasonable
interpretation that will make Applicant’s explanations about his lawsuit omission in his e-
QIP factually justifiable. Use of a subjective intent test is not intended to straightjacket
either party with particular words and phrases, but rather to avert definitional traps.
Potential mitigating conditions are not available to Applicant under the facts of
this case. Not until he was confronted with the SOR in September 2015 did he
acknowledge his Company B lawsuit omission and offer explanations of mistake and
misunderstanding of the question. By this time, DOD investigative resources had
already discovered the existence of the lawsuit naming, inter alia, Applicant as a
defendant.
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s intentional
withholding of material information about his involvement in a major and material lawsuit
in the e-QIP he completed, his explanations and timing of his corrections are insufficient
to convincingly refute and mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, are each core policy concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15),
13
which have been compromised by Applicant in repeated instances in this case. Imputed
acts of Applicant dishonesty and judgment lapses in this case are not mitigated.
From a whole-person standpoint, there is considerable evidence favoring
Applicant from his company president, consultants, and co-workers. Each of his
references places a high value on his contributions and adherence to safeguarding
classified and sensitive information. Judgment and trust issues associated with his
withholding material information from his Company B software supplier about his
interests in Company A (a major competitor of Company B) and his ensuing falsification
of his 2014 e-QIP by withholding his involvement in Company B’s lawsuit cannot be
reconciled with principles of honesty, trust, and good judgment. Overall, Applicant is not
able to demonstrate with his proofs that he possesses the level of trustworthiness,
reliability, and good judgment necessary  to meet security eligibility requirements.  
In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the
respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and
circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraph 1.a and 1.b. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1b:                     Against Applicant
                        Conclusio  n  s    
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
14
  
15
