 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-04623 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esquire 
       For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a response notarized on January 12, 2016, Applicant admitted all allegations 
raised under Guideline F and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on April 
12, 2016. The matter was scheduled on May 20, 2016, for a June 22, 2016, hearing. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered eight documents, which were accepted without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-8. Applicant offered testimony and one document, which 
was accepted without objection as Ex. A. The record was held open through July 6, 
2016, in the event the parties wished to submit additional material. The transcript (Tr.) 
 
 
 
 
2 
was received on June 30, 2016. On July 6, 2016, Applicant submitted four additional 
packets of documentation, accepted without objection as Exs. B-E. The record was then 
closed. After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old consultant with a defense contractor, for which she has 
worked since 2011. She has earned a high school diploma, attended some college 
courses, and has worked in positions in support of the United States Government since 
she was 17 years of age. She is a single mother of three minor children, ranging in ages 
from early teen to a one-year-old. At issue are 21 delinquent debts amounting to a sum 
in excess of $32,300. She has not received formal financial counseling. 
 
At least a decade ago, at about age 22 or 23, Applicant was first granted a 
security clearance. At the time, she was earning about $25,000 a year. She was 
informed that her financial situation potentially posed a security concern. Consequently, 
she was urged to repair her credit status. (Tr. 13, 21) Applicant tried to approach the 
issue as her salary rose to about $40,000 a year, but she found she was only getting 
further into debt by the time her second child was born.  
 
Applicant believed that she had satisfied her student loans on her own and she 
stopped acquiring new credit cards. She testified that when she could, she would make 
occasional payments to one of her creditors or “at least give them something to let them 
know that, you know, [she had not] forgotten about it.” (Tr. 24) At one point, she worked 
with a debt consolidation company, but she abandoned their arrangement.1 (Tr. 40) 
Later, in about September 2015, she solicited the aid of a law firm to dispute credit 
report entries and “help get things off [her] credit.” (Tr. 13) The firm’s focus was limited 
and it did not consolidate her debts. She eventually discontinued her arrangement with 
that firm, too. 
 
Applicant then enlisted the services of a debt consolidating company in late May 
2016. (Exs. A, E) Under its plan, she is to pay the company $359 a month to be put 
toward about $17,228 in estimated debt.2 (Ex. E) This includes the costs related to a car 
repossession she thought she could address by herself, but her efforts were financially 
foiled by the birth of her third child. Under the company’s plan, Applicant would be left 
with a net monthly remainder of about $610. (Ex. E; Tr. 62)  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant stated, “I stopped working with them. I’m not quite sure what the reason was. I don’t know if I 
was unhappy with their company or I couldn’t keep up with the payments or something.” (Tr. 40) 
 
2 Applicant signed her enrollment agreement on May 25, 2016. (Ex. E) She testified that she made her 
first payment on the plan in June 2016, shortly before the June 22, 2016, hearing. (Tr. 15, 66) Applicant 
submitted bank statement excerpts with her post-hearing materials, but there is no clear evidence 
reflecting that single payment to the debt consolidator. See Exs. A-E. Consequently, there is no 
documentary evidence reflecting an established, regular, and timely repayment record toward that plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Presently, Applicant is back in school. She has no delinquent debts related to her 
academic return and her current student loan of $5,000 is in deferral. (Tr. 20, 63) She 
enjoys her work and finds that her annual salary of $60,000 helps her meet her most 
necessary needs. It is her goal to one day buy a house, but she understands that she 
must first devote more effort toward fixing her credit and addressing her debts.  
 
Applicant receives no child support from the two fathers of her children. (Tr. 16-
18) The state has had difficulty making official contact with the father of her eldest child, 
although she knows where he resides. She hopes to start receiving some financial 
support from the father of her two younger children if he wins a pending Social Security 
disability appeal. (Tr. 18-19) She accepted the characterization that she simply has not 
been able to financially afford the expenses needed to support her family. (Tr. 24-25) 
 
The delinquent debts at issue in the SOR include:  
 
1.a - $2,480 adverse judgment from November 2014 – This debt is related to a 
balance owed to an apartment complex. At the June 2016 hearing, Applicant testified 
that she had been working with them to obtain a repayment plan under which she could 
make monthly $200 payments. (Tr. 26) After the hearing, she introduced a “recurring 
credit card agreement,” dated January 2016, under which $223 would be charged to her 
credit card each month toward satisfaction of the debt. (Ex. B) In January 2016, she 
made a single payment to the complex under this agreement. (Tr. 27) Presently, she is 
negotiating another arrangement with the complex. (Tr. 29) 
 
1.b - $2,569 state tax lien entered in January 2010 – Applicant was told that she 
could negotiate a repayment plan with the state after she paid a certain percent of the 
balance owed. To date, no payments have been made toward that percentage.3 (Tr. 33) 
Since 2010, other state-related debts have arisen, increasing the balance owed to the 
state at issue through a collection entity. (Tr. 30-34) 
 
1.c - $808 telecommunications collection balance – Applicant failed to pay her 
final cable bill before moving, resulting in a balance owed. This debt is now incorporated 
within her repayment plan. (Tr. 37-38)  
 
1.d - $15,384 delinquent balance remaining owed after resale of a vehicle 
repossessed in 2014 – Applicant could not keep up with the payments on an 
approximately $22,000 automobile after she became pregnant with her youngest child.  
This debt is now incorporated within her repayment plan. (Tr. 43-44) 
 
1.e-1.f - $169 and $201, respectively – These two unpaid, charged-off accounts 
are related to sums owed by Applicant to a former credit union. They are not part of her 
repayment plan. She intends to pay them independently in the future. (Tr. 43-45) 
                                                          
3 Elsewhere, Applicant stated that she “did pay them three hundred and something dollars” in 2015. Ex. 
D, a credit union monthly statement extract, reflects that $320 was paid to the comptroller of her state on 
August 25, 2015. It is unclear, however, whether this sum was for unpaid taxes. 
 
 
 
 
4 
1.g - $636 telecommunications collection balance - This debt is now incorporated 
within Applicant’s repayment plan. (Tr. 45) 
 
1.h - $636 telecommunications collection balance – It is unclear whether this debt 
entry is a duplicate of the above or a separate debt. Applicant provided no documentary 
evidence indicating it was a duplicate. This debt is now incorporated within her 
repayment plan. (Tr. 46-47) 
 
1.i - $611 charged-off credit union account balance – Thus far unaddressed, 
Applicant is trying to have this debt included in her repayment plan. (Tr. 47) 
 
1.j - $1,330 adverse judgment from September 2008 – Applicant has no 
knowledge of what this account represents and her former law firm could not identify the 
debt. She does not know if it was ever formally disputed. She is waiting for her 
repayment plan company to investigate the account before taking further action. (Tr. 48-
49) There is no documentary evidence of other action taken. 
 
1.k – 1.l - $2,461 and $2,214, respectively – Applicant testified that these student 
loan accounts, indicated in her credit report as having been opened in May 2008, have 
been satisfied. (Tr. 49-50; Ex. 6 at 5) There may be some confusion between the 
student loans at issue and the ones for which she provided documentation after the 
hearing (Ex. C), which indicate a disbursement date of February 5, 2005.  Without more 
information or explanation, the provided documentation fails to show that the two 
student loans specifically at issue have been satisfied. 
 
1.m - $1,000 collection account for telecommunications balance -  This debt is 
now incorporated within Applicant’s repayment plan. (Tr. 51) 
 
1.n - $540 collection account for telecommunications balance - This debt is now 
incorporated within Applicant’s repayment plan. (Tr. 52) 
 
1.o – 1.p - $250 and $250, respectively – Applicant acknowledges that these two 
debts have separate and distinct account numbers, but feels they may be duplicate 
entries for the same debt. No documentary evidence was introduced to that effect. They 
are not included in her repayment plan and have not been otherwise addressed. 
 
1.q, 1.r, 1.t and 1.u - $205, $200, $150, $65, respectively – Applicant admits 
responsibility for these delinquent debts, which are related to parking or driving tickets. 
(Tr. 54). Applicant testified that she satisfied these debts in 2014, but provided no 
documentary evidence to that effect. (Tr. 54-55).   
 
1.s - $152 – Applicant admits responsibility for this automobile insurance-related 
debt, which remains unpaid. (Tr. 55-56) 
 
Applicant is unaware of any other delinquent debts. (Tr. 58) She currently 
maintains a secured, paid-in-advance, credit card, with which she hopes to improve her 
 
 
 
 
5 
credit rating.4 She does not currently own a car. She stated that she takes home about 
$1,800 every two weeks. (Tr. 60) At the time of the hearing, she had approximately $30 
to $40 in her banking account, and she contributes an unspecified amount to a 401k 
account through her workplace. (Tr. 62) Other than the tax issue noted above, she is 
current on her state and federal taxes. Her strategy for ultimately addressing the debts 
at issue is through her repayment plan company, which she stated is willing to work with 
her in terms of payment amounts in light of her income. (Tr. 65-66) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
                                                          
4 It is unclear whether this is the credit card noted in Ex. B, upon which she makes payments to the debt 
noted at SOR allegation 1.a. 
 
 
 
 
6 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence purporting to show Applicant 
was delinquent on multiple debts, including a state tax lien, student loans, and 
automobile repossession. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
For at least a decade, Applicant has had financial issues which she knew could 
adversely affect her security clearance eligibility. She has made more than one attempt 
to address them. Despite expressions that she would address her delinquent debts, no 
documentary evidence was introduced indicating that she has followed through with any 
of her plans to notable fruition. Even her most recent repayment plan seems to be so 
new that she has yet to establish a record of timely repayment toward her debts. Today, 
the relevant debt balances remain virtually unaddressed.   
 
Applicant provided scant information regarding conditions that could show her 
financial distress was created by conditions largely outside of her own control. At best, 
she attributes her delinquent debts to insufficient income, a growing family, and, to a 
lesser extent, a lack of child support from the fathers of her children. No extraordinary 
periods of unemployment were noted. Indeed, she stressed she has worked in support 
of the government since she was a teen. No significant illnesses or deaths in the family 
were referenced, and she has not been divorced. Moreover, she provided no 
documentation reflecting her efforts to secure financial assistance from the father of her 
eldest child. While she hopes to receive some financial assistance from the father of her 
youngest children in the future, that hope is first predicated on his winning a Social 
Security disability appeal. Consequently, such financial assistance, at this point, is 
speculative. Further, little evidence was shown demonstrating what continued efforts 
she took throughout the years to responsibly meet the challenges of her financial 
distress. Finally, there is no documentary evidence showing that her limited dealings 
with a debt consolidation company and a law firm included formal financial counseling. 
 
Applicant testified that she retained a law firm to dispute incorrect or dated 
information from her credit report, but she provided no paperwork showing such efforts 
were attempted, successful, or based on a reasonable belief that such adverse 
information was posted in error. With the exception of a credit union statement showing 
the sum of about $320 was expended toward a state debt, and her assurance a single 
payment toward her latest repayment plan was made, there is scant evidence she has 
successfully executed any efforts to address the delinquent debts at issue. 
Consequently, none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
 
 
 
 
8 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a highly credible 33-year-old single mother who has worked in 
support of the United States Government since she was a teenager. Although she is 
endeavoring to complete a college education, she recognizes that she only has a net 
remainder of about $600 a month after meeting her current expenses. Meanwhile, her 
three children are growing and, it may be assumed, maturing in their needs. 
Consequently, her financial distress is something she strives to end.  
 
There is no indication, however, that Applicant’s income will soon increase to 
help meet her financial needs. She testified that her present repayment plan 
administrators are willing to work with her if her payments are too high, and she hopes 
to receive supplemental child support income from one of the fathers of her children if 
he wins an outstanding Social Security appeal. Those factors, however, are not 
currently fully realized aspects of Applicant’s endeavor to address her delinquent debts. 
 
Over the past decade, as Applicant’s income increased, so did the size and 
financial needs of her family. By her own admission, Applicant simply lacks the income 
to address all of her family’s needs, as well as her delinquent debts, with her current 
income. Therefore, this clearly is not a situation where an applicant is necessarily living 
beyond her means or refusing to honor her debts. The result, however, remains that the 
facts presented at this time, and in the absence of a more sustained record of debt 
repayment through her repayment plan, are insufficient to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
This process does not demand that an applicant satisfy, or even address, all 
delinquent debts at issue. It does, however, expect that an applicant develop and 
implement a reasonable strategy or plan to address one’s delinquent debts. It then 
requires documentary evidence that such a plan has been successfully implemented 
and sustained. Applicant has failed to do that here. Under these facts, I find that 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
