 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04098 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 15, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 12, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2016.  On August 1, 2016, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 23, 2016. The hearing was held 
as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered seven exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 7.  Applicant testified, called one witness, 
and offered nine exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – I. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on August 31, 2016. The record was held open until 
September 7, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant did not 
 
2 
 
 
submit additional documents. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits all SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since 
August 2003. He left high school in order to earn money to support his family. He 
earned his General Equivalency Degree in June 1993. He is married and has two 
children, a daughter, age 21 and a son, age 17. (Tr. at 10, 22; Gov 1; Gov 5)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he had two 
mortgage payments that were more than 120 days past due. The first mortgage was 
delinquent in the amount of $2,270. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 4 at 4) The second mortgage 
account was past due in the approximate amount of $49,073. (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 4 at 4) 
He also had a $150 medical account that was placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 
at 1). 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant states the two mortgages (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b) are combined into one account. Only the balance alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is accurate. 
The total amount past due for the two mortgages was $14,317.77. Applicant has lived in 
his home for 16 years. He will be current on his mortgage payments within 30 days. He 
admits to the $150 medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but cannot identify it. Once he 
locates the creditor, he will pay the bill. (Response to SOR; AE D at 2) 
 
Applicant states that his home is worth more than double what he owes on it. He 
has no credit card debt. He has been married more than 23 years. He has never 
collected unemployment or asked for financial assistance. He takes pride in his job and 
who he is as an American. (Answer to SOR)  
  
During the hearing, Applicant provided proof that he took out a loan from his 
401(k) account to bring his mortgage current. He paid the past due amount on March 
15, 2016. It is now current. (AE D; AE G) He also provided proof that he paid the $150 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. (AE F; Gov 7 at 1)  
 
Applicant’s wife testified that she is primarily responsible for paying the 
household bills. On occasion, they have struggled because of either Applicant or herself 
being laid off. She has been employed as a special education instructional assistant 
with a local school district for the past nine years. The first five years, she was a part-
time employee. She has worked full-time the past four years. In the summers, her hours 
are reduced from 30 hours a week to 14 hours and her pay is reduced by $3.35 an 
hour. Her reduced summer hours adversely affected the family’s finances and they 
would get a little behind. Often this resulted in paying the mortgage payments late or 
making partial payments. (Tr. 22-29) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s wife takes responsibility for the late mortgage payments. She would 
not tell Applicant about them because he had other things on his mind. There were two 
occasions where she had to tell her husband because they were three months behind in 
payments and their home was up for foreclosure review. Once Applicant became aware 
of the situation, he contacted the mortgagor and arranged to take a loan from his 401(k) 
to bring the mortgage current and to pay some of his daughter’s medical bills. She and 
her husband now communicate better about the household expenses. (Tr. 31-36, 43) 
 
In addition to the regular household expenses, they would spend money on the 
children’s extra-curricular activities, car repairs, home repairs and medical bills for her 
children. Their daughter attended counseling once a week for two years while in high 
school. This was not covered by insurance. It cost $125 a session.  She also saw a 
neurologist for migraines. Their son attended physical therapy because of a bone 
growth condition. (Tr. 24, 32, 37-38) 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary increased by $10,000 this past year. His base take 
home income is $3,000 a month. This does not include any overtime or per diem 
Applicant may earn. His wife’s monthly income is $1,800 from September to July and 
$800 from July to August. Their monthly expenses are approximately $2,947. 
Applicant’s wife also has a monthly car payment of $368. W ith the exception of her 
automobile insurance, their daughter is self-supporting. Applicant has over $53,000 in 
his 401(k) account. Applicant and his wife purchased used cars. His car is paid off. At 
present, Applicant states that their financial status is the best it has ever been. (Tr. 10, 
44, 47, 49-52; AE B, C and H)  
 
In the past, Applicant and his wife have struggled to pay their bills. They have 
always resolved them.  An August 2016 credit report lists a charged off cable company 
account in the amount of $465. (Gov 7 at 1-2) When asked about the debt during the 
hearing, Applicant disputes this debt. They switched to this cable company in order to 
save money. The cable company kept increasing the bill so Applicant cancelled the 
contract. He does not believe he owes the cable company any money. He disputed the 
debt over the telephone. (Tr. 59-60) 
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
Applicant provided a copy of a performance evaluation covering the periods June 
2015 to March 2016. It was favorable and Applicant met standards. (AE A) Applicant 
has never been disciplined or suspended from work. He has never had any security 
violations. He testified he is a good employee and good at what he does. (Tr. 61-62)    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations), apply.  Applicant and his wife have 
struggled to meet monthly expenses for years. This caused them to get behind in some 
bills to include paying late or partial mortgage payments.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions apply:  
 
 AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. While 
Applicant has occasionally gotten behind on his bills, he has a track record of paying his 
bills when he is able to pay the bills. He does not ignore his debts, but paid when he 
could when he was struggling. His wife did not tell him about the late mortgage 
payments. Once he learned of the late mortgage payments, he took out a loan from his 
401k to bring the mortgage current on two occasions. A recent raise and better 
communication have allowed he and his wife to be in a better financial position. 
Applicant’s past financial issues do not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
6 
 
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.  Although, not brought up in detail, 
Applicant and his wife have both been laid off on occasion which adversely affected the 
family finances. Applicant’s wife’s hours and income are reduced during the summer 
which resulted in the family finances getting a little behind. Applicant and his wife 
always attempted to resolve their bills when they had the money to do so. They do not 
live a lavish lifestyle. They acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies because Applicant’s financial situation is now under control. Aside from a 
disputed cable bill, Applicant has resolved all of his delinquent accounts and is able to 
pay his monthly expenses. 
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant paid the past-due amounts on the 
mortgages alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He is current on his mortgage payments. He 
also paid the delinquent medical account alleged in SOR & 1.c.  His credit reports 
indicate no other delinquent accounts aside from an outstanding cable bill. Applicant 
denies this debt, but has not filed a formal dispute with the credit reporting agencies. 
Should he file a formal dispute and the outcome of the dispute is not in his favor, he is 
capable of paying the cable debt. His past history of catching up on all of his financial 
obligations make it likely that he would pay the cable debt if it is proved to be his debt. 
Applicant demonstrated that he is making a good-faith effort to resolve his accounts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
7 
 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
performance evaluation and his 13 year employment history with the defense 
contractor.  Although Applicant and his wife have struggled to pay the bills on occasion, 
they always have been able to eventually resolve their delinquent accounts. Their 
financial situation has improved and they are now able to meet their financial 
obligations. Security concerns under financial considerations are mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.c:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
