 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02501 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations, alcohol consumption, and 
criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations), G (alcohol consumption), and J (criminal conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 28, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 24, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
 
2 
 
on June 28, 2016, scheduling the hearing for July 19, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old software engineer for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since February 2012. He is applying for a security 
clearance for the first time. He attended college for a period, but he has not earned a 
degree. He has never married and he has no children.1 
 
Applicant was arrested in July 2005 and charged with driving while intoxicated 
(DWI) and disregarding a stop sign. He pleaded no contest to the DWI charge. His 
sentence included a fine; probation for three months; community service; and 
attendance at a driver safety course. He completed all the terms of his probation.2 
 
Applicant was arrested in August 2012 and charged with DWI; operating a 
vehicle with a suspended license; and speeding. He pleaded guilty to the DWI charge, 
and the other charges were dismissed. He was sentenced to probation for one year; 31 
hours of community service; attendance at a driver safety course; and participation in a 
Mothers Against Drunk Drivers (MADD) meeting. Applicant did not complete his 
community service, and he was ordered to serve 30 days in jail in lieu of community 
service in August 2015. He has now completed all his sentencing requirements.3 
 
Applicant admitted that he drove after drinking at least once or twice after his 
2012 arrest, but not recently.4 He stated that he has disassociated himself from the 
people that had a bad influence on him. He stated that he currently only drinks in 
moderation and he does not drink and drive.5  
 
The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling about $15,987. Applicant admitted 
owing all the debts at one time. He stated that the debts resulted from him being “young 
and naïve.” He also noted that a $3,264 debt to a university (SOR ¶ 3.j) resulted when 
the university withdrew his scholarship without just cause. He reported several 
delinquent debts on his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), which he 
submitted in September 2012. He discussed his finances when he was interviewed for 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-20, 32; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 6. 
 
3 Tr. at 22-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 6. 
 
4 This information was not alleged in the SOR. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be 
used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered in assessing mitigation and in the whole-person 
analysis. 
5 Tr. at 18, 25-30. 
 
3 
 
his background investigation in November 2012. He told the investigator that his 
finances had stabilized and were improving since he started his employment in 
February 2012. He stated that he had contacted several of the creditors and was 
working with them to resolve his debts.6 
 
Applicant is credited with paying the $310 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 3.f. He has not 
paid any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. Several of the debts became delinquent 
after his November 2012 interview. He testified that he received a pay raise in January 
2016 that he will use to pay his debts. He stated that he is saving money to pay his 
debts all at once. He has about $3,500 saved for that purpose.7 
 
Applicant called two witnesses and he submitted letters attesting to his excellent 
job performance. He is praised for his reliability, work ethic, trustworthiness, 
responsibility, maturity, and honesty.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
6 Tr. at 18-19, 31-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3-6. 
 
7 Tr. at 18, 31-34, 38-42, 54-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5. 
 
8 Tr. at 43-51; AE A, B. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant stated that his delinquent debts resulted from him being “young and 
naïve.” He has worked for his current employer since February 2012. When he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in November 2012, he told the investigator 
that his finances had stabilized and were improving and that he had contacted several 
of the creditors and was working with them to resolve his debts. Since that time, he has 
paid one SOR debt and more debts became delinquent. He stated that he is saving 
money to pay his debts all at once and that he has about $3,500 saved for that purpose. 
The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See 
ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-
08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. The paid debt alleged in SOR ¶ 3.f is mitigated. There are no 
mitigating conditions applicable to the remaining debts.  
 
Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
The security concerns for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct are set out 
in AG ¶¶ 21 and 30:       
 
21. The Concern. Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the 
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
30. The Concern. Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22 and 31 describe conditions that could raise alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct security concerns and may be disqualifying: 
 
 
6 
 
22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related criminal offenses are sufficient to establish the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶¶ 23 and 32 describe conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct security concerns. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; 
 
32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
 
7 
 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s last arrest was in August 2012. However, he admitted that he 
continued to drink and drive after the arrest and that he served 30 days in jail in August 
2015 because he did not complete his community service. He testified that he currently 
only drinks in moderation and he does not drink and drive. He has stable employment 
and good character evidence.  
 
Despite those mitigating factors, I have lingering concerns about Applicant’s 
alcohol abuse and criminal conduct. The above mitigating factors are insufficient to 
dispel the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, G, and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, he served 30 
days in jail in August 2015 because he did not complete his community service, and he 
has unresolved financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 3.g-3.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
