 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01239 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 12, 2014. On 
August 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they 
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 24, 2015, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on February 11, 2016. On the same day, a complete copy of the file of 
 
 2
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. The FORM included the SOR (Item 1), Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Item 
4), Applicant’s SCA (Item 5), court records documenting the judgment entered against 
Applicant and alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a (Item 6), two credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 
August 2015 (Item 7) and July 2014 (Item 8), documents pertaining to Applicant’s 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy (Item 9), and a summary of Applicant’s personal subject 
interviews (PSI) by a security investigator in July and August 2014 (Item 10). She 
received the FORM on February 16, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on October 19, 2016.  
 
Evidentiary Issue 
 
 Item 10, the summary of three interviews conducted during Applicant’s 
background investigation, was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. 
However, she was informed by Department Counsel that she was entitled to make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and updates to Item 10. She was also informed that 
she was entitled to object to consideration of Item 10 on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. Her failure to respond to the FORM constitutes a waiver of any objection 
to Item 10. See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) (“Although pro 
se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
and 1.f. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e. Her admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old project administrator employed by a federal contractor 
since July 2008. She has a high school education. She married in July 1989 and has 
four adult children. She has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant and her husband filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in April 2000. 
One of their daughters was bitten in the face by a neighbor’s dog. The neighbor did not 
have homeowner’s insurance, and they could not afford to pay their daughter’s medical 
expenses. (Item 10 at 7.) The bankruptcy petition included the fees for an emergency 
physician, a plastic surgeon, a hospital bill and several related medical expenses. It also 
included several credit card accounts that were about 60 days delinquent. It did not 
include their residence or their two automobiles. (Item 9; Item 10 at 7.) They received a 
discharge in July 2000. (Item 9.) The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f.  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application (Item 5) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
 In addition to the bankruptcy alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, the SOR alleges five 
delinquent debts that are reflected in her CBRs. The evidence concerning these debts is 
summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: unsatisfied judgment for $11,895. In the winter of 2007, Applicant 
and her family were asked by the owner of their home to move out, after one of their 
sons was involved in an altercation and was stabbed. The owner claimed that the 
altercation occurred on the rental property, but Applicant claimed that it happened in a 
nearby park. A few days later, the owner sent an eviction notice, ordering them to 
vacate the property within 30 days. Applicant and her family stayed in the home until 
February 2008. (Item 10 at 5.) In June 2008, the owner sued Applicant and her husband 
for unpaid rent and damage to the property. Applicant did not appear in court to contest 
the owner’s claims. A default judgment was entered against Applicant and her husband 
in August 2008. (Item 6.) In her PSI, Applicant stated that the judgment was satisfied by 
garnishment of her husband’s pay. (Item 10 at 6.) In her answer to the SOR, she stated 
that she is paying $400 per month on this debt and has reduced the balance to less 
than $5,000. She did not submit any evidence of payments. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e: telephone bill charged off for $127 and placed for 
collection of about $176. Applicant denied this debt. The July 2014 CBR reflects that 
the debt was charged off in September 2007 and sold to a factoring company in 
December 2007. There is no evidence that the debt has been resolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: car loan charged off in April 2008 and placed for collection of 
about $4,000. The July 2014 CBR reflects that a car loan was obtained by Applicant 
and her husband in August 2006. (Item 8 at 7.) In the PSI, Applicant stated that she 
became delinquent on her car payments after being laid off, the car was repossessed, 
and there was a deficiency after the car was sold. (Item 10 at 8.) Applicant listed a layoff 
in her SCA as the reason for a job change in 2008, but she did not list any periods of 
unemployment. (Item 5 at 11.) The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: debt to drug store placed for collection of $274 in December 
2007. This debt is reflected in the July 2014 CBR. Applicant denied this debt, but she 
submitted no evidence that she had contacted the creditor, disputed the debt, or 
otherwise resolved it. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
 
 4
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The same delinquent telephone bill is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e. When the 
same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the 
duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-
04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). Accordingly, I have resolved SOR ¶ 1.e in 
Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish 
two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  The 
following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 
 6
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant has encountered several 
circumstances largely beyond her control. Her daughter’s dog-bite injury was a 
circumstance beyond her control. Although Applicant already had delinquent consumer 
debts when her daughter was injured, the medical expenses triggered the Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Applicant attributed the repossession of her car to being laid off in July 
2008. She listed a layoff as a reason for a job change in her SCA, but she did not list 
any periods of unemployment. Her son’s involvement in an altercation was a condition 
beyond her control, but it does not justify the non-payment of rent and property damage 
that resulted in a judgment against her. She claimed that she was making payments on 
the judgment, but she submitted no documentary evidence of payments on any of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. In her PSI, Applicant stated that she did not 
participate in the financial counseling associated with her Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Her 
financial problems are not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Although Applicant claimed that she had made 
payments on some of the debts alleged in the SOR, she submitted no documentary 
evidence of payment. 
 
 AG 20(e) is not established. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant disputed the 
validity of the telephone debt and the drug store debt, but she submitted no evidence 
that she had disputed the debts with the creditors, collection agencies, or credit 
reporting bureaus. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
 7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate her 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her financial 
history. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
