 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04048 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 14, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 13, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for July 21, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted documents that were marked AE E and F and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2003. He worked at the same company as a contractor from 
1994 to 2003. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has held since about 
1983. He has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 1980. He is married with two 
adult children.1 
 
 Applicant did not file federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012 
when they were due. He used a tax professional to prepare his returns, but the 
individual did not contact Applicant during the 2012 filing season. Applicant did not 
contact the professional, seek another professional, or file the 2011 and 2012 returns in 
a timely manner himself. Applicant admitted he procrastinated in taking care of his 
taxes.2   
 
 Applicant filed his 2011 federal income tax return in March 2015. There was 
$10,240 withheld from his pay during 2011 for his federal income taxes, and he paid 
$1,500 on April 15, 2012. He paid $3,954 in March 2015 to resolve his remaining tax 
liability for 2011.3   
 
 Applicant filed his 2012 federal income tax return in February 2015. There was 
$9,028 withheld from his pay during 2012 for his federal income taxes. He paid $3,201 
in February 2015 and an additional $1,317 in April 2015 to resolve his tax liability for 
2012.4   
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for his actions. He credibly testified that he has 
learned a valuable lesson and that he will never again fail to file his tax returns on time. 
His returns for 2013 through 2015 were filed on time. He does not owe any taxes, and 
his finances are sound. He has not received formal financial counseling. He submitted 
documents and letters attesting to his excellent job performance.5 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19, 38; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21, 30-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
3 Tr. at 20-23, 34; AE E. 
4 Tr. at 20-23, 34; AE F. 
5 Tr. at 21-25, 28-29, 35-38, 43; AE A-D. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns and he did 
not pay the taxes from those years when they were due. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant filed his 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns in February and 
March 2015, and he paid the remaining taxes due in February, March, and April 2015, 
about a year before the SOR was issued. Applicant accepted responsibility for his 
actions. He credibly testified that he has learned a valuable lesson and that he will 
 
5 
 
always file his tax returns on time. Applicant overcame the heavy burden upon an 
applicant who shirks his tax responsibilities. See ISCR Case No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 27, 2016). The above mitigating conditions are applicable. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s steady employment with a defense contractor. He failed 
in his fundamental obligations to file his tax returns and pay his taxes. However, he 
resolved those matters about a year before the SOR was issued. I am convinced the 
conduct will not be repeated. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
