1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case: 15-01034 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Scott Neinas, Esq. 
October 7, 2016 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on six debts in the total amount of 
$55,724. He has resolved all of his delinquencies. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On October 9, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
Applicant answered the SOR on November 11, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 13, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
 
 
2 
 
 
on June 15, 2016, scheduling the hearing for July 12, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through AE Q, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on July 20, 2016. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. 
Applicant presented additional exhibits marked AE R and AE S.1 Department Counsel 
had no objections to AE R or AE S, and they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old and single. He has worked as a mechanic for a 
Government contractor for the past 22 years. He has held a security clearance in 
connection with his work since 1980. (Tr. 22-25, 49.)  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owes approximately $75,049 on seven delinquent 
financial obligations. One debt, SOR ¶ 1.a, was duplicated in SOR ¶ 1.f, and this debt 
will only be discussed once. In his Answer, Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations. 
His debts are documented in the record credit reports dated May 23, 2012; January 22, 
2015; February 2, 2016; and July 11, 2016. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 7.) After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to the high cost of extensive dental 
work he required from 2005 to 2010. He documented that he spent over $50,000 for his 
dental work during this time period. He financed much of the dental work, and was 
unable to afford the resulting loans and credit card bills. (AE B; Tr. 42-45, 57.) 
 
 In May 2010 Applicant sought help managing his debt from a debt management 
company (DMC). He was current with his payments at that time. He entered into a 
service agreement to pay the DMC approximately $666 per month for three years, 
which would be directly withdrawn from his bank account and used to resolve these 
debts. He provided copies of bank statements showing he successfully made all of his 
payments. The DMC negotiated with four of his creditors and settled those debts in full. 
A letter from the DMC, dated March 30, 2016, congratulated Applicant on completing 
the repayment program and noted the four listed debts were settled. The settled 
accounts are noted below. (AE I; AE J; AE Q; AE R; AE S; Tr. 27, 37-42, 57-59, 67-69.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to be indebted on a credit card debt in the 
amount of $19,325. This was established to be the same debt as that identified in SOR 
¶ 1.f for $25,623.2 It was settled by the DMC for a payment of $22,600 in February 
2013. This debt is resolved. (GE 2; GE 4; AE A; AE R; Tr. 26, 35-36, 51, 55-57, 65-66.) 
                                                 
1 Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits were marked by Applicant as AE Q and AE R. They were renamed to 
avoid having two exhibits named AE Q. 
2 Both debts were listed with the same creditor name and account number, but appear on two different 
credit reports. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 7.) The larger amount, $25,623, is used herein as the amount owed in 
any calculations of Applicant’s total debt, but this debt will not be counted twice. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted on a delinquent debt 
consolidation loan in the amount of $15,209. It was settled by the DMC for $13,760 in 
November 2011. This debt is resolved. (GE 2; AE A; AE R; Tr. 27, 31, 51.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c to be indebted on a loan in the amount of 
$3,415. It was settled by the DMC for $3,526 in August 2014. Applicant’s July 2016 
credit report reflects this debt as a paid collection account. This debt is resolved. (GE 2; 
GE 7; AE A; AE R; Tr. 31, 51.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d to be indebted on a medical debt in the 
amount of $3,402. Applicant incurred this debt between 2005 and 2010, as a result of 
dental work. Applicant’s January 2015 credit report reflects this debt as a “paid 
collection.” This debt is resolved. (GE 3; Tr. 33-34, 51.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e to be indebted on a collection account in the 
amount of $3,700. Applicant sent this creditor a certified letter, dated May 2, 2016, 
disputing this debt. Applicant’s 2012 credit report reflects that this debt was originally 
incurred with a creditor by another name. That original creditor was repaid $2,018 
through the DMC in March 2013, to resolve this debt. It is resolved. (GE 5; GE 7; AE E; 
AE R; Tr. 34-35, 70-71.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g to be indebted on a credit card debt in the 
amount of $4,375. Applicant’s January 2015 credit report reflects this debt as a “paid 
collection.” This debt is resolved. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant participated in two on-line credit counseling courses in May 2016. He 
presented a certificate of counseling as evidence he completed the financial courses. 
He testified that he will utilize some of the lessons he learned in the course, including 
saving money by packing lunches and eating dinners at home. His personal financial 
statement indicates he has $1,775 left monthly after he pays his bills. (AE C; AE D; Tr. 
46-47.) 
 
 Applicant presented four letters of recommendation from coworkers and friends. 
They indicate that Applicant is hardworking and honest. Applicant has received a 
number of awards, certificates, and letters of commendation for his excellent job 
performance. (AE N; AE O.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 By 2010 Applicant had accumulated six debts in the total approximate amount of 
$55,724. He was unable to manage this large amount of debt. His debts establish both 
a history of delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy his obligations at 
that time. The evidence raises security concerns under the above conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant addressed all of his delinquent debts in a responsible manner. He 
incurred the debts as a result of costly dental procedures, which was a circumstance 
beyond his control. When he realized that his debts extended beyond his financial 
means, he contacted the DMC and immediately began to resolve the debts through 
their assistance. All six debts are fully resolved and have been resolved since at least 
2014, well before the DoD CAF issued the SOR in October 2015. His finances are 
under control and his previously delinquent debts are repaid. Applicant’s former 
 
 
6 
 
 
indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Future financial delinquencies are unlikely. The security concerns with 
respect to his financial delinquencies are mitigated under the above conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served his employer, 
a Government contractor, for more than 22 years. He has held a security clearance, 
without violation, for over 36 years. He acted responsibly by resolving all of his debts as 
promptly as circumstances allowed. His friends and coworkers speak highly of him, and 
his work performance has merited several certificates and awards. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                 
 
   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
