 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04442 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant; Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 11, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
 
2 
 
 
 
20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 22, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 5, 2016.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant both requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Belarus. The requests were not admitted in evidence but 
were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. Neither side objected, and 
I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I and II. The facts 
administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since 2014. He is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married with a child.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Belarus to Belarusian parents. He came to the United 
States in 2003. He attended college here, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2012. He is 
still considered a Belarusian citizen by the Belarusian government, but he destroyed his 
Belarusian passport in the presence of his company’s facility security officer. Applicant 
traveled to Belarus on his U.S. passport with a visa. He is willing to renounce his 
Belarusian citizenship, but it is a long process that may create more issues than it 
resolves.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife is also from Belarus. They have been married since 2006. She 
became a U.S. citizen in 2015. She is still considered a dual U.S. and Belarusian 
citizen. Her brother lives in the United States.3 
 
 Applicant’s parents are Belarusian citizens. They are divorced. Applicant’s father 
was approved to immigrate to the United States. He was scheduled to arrive in the 
United States in August 2016, where he will remain as a permanent resident. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 24; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-29, 37; GE 1, 2; AE D, J, L. 
 
3 Tr. at 17, 29, 34-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant’s mother would like to immigrate to the United States, but she has not yet 
been approved to do so.4 
 
 Applicant’s sister married an Israeli citizen and lives in Israel. She is a dual 
Belarusian and Israeli citizen. Applicant’s uncle, cousin, and parents-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Belarus. He has maintained social contact with a few individuals who 
are citizens and residents of Belarus. He had periodic contact with a Russian citizen 
who was residing in the United States, but Applicant lost contact with him after Applicant 
moved to a different state. There is no indication that Applicant’s family members and 
associates have direct ties to the Belarusian or Israeli governments.5 
 
 Applicant credibly stated that his allegiance lies with the United States. He came 
to the United States for its “opportunities, freedom of religion, speech, [and] economic 
freedoms.” He has a good job, and his wife also works. They have about $140,000 in 
savings and retirement accounts. He has no intention to return to Belarus to live. He 
stated that he would report any attempt to use his family in Belarus against him.6 
 
Applicant submitted numerous documents and letters attesting to his excellent 
job performance. He is praised for his energy, enthusiasm, leadership, reliability, 
trustworthiness, loyalty, ethical values, honesty, work ethic, professionalism, dedication, 
and integrity.7 
 
Belarus 
 
 Belarus declared its sovereignty in July 1990 and its independence from the 
Soviet Union in August 1991. The United States recognized Belarus as an independent 
state in December 1991. Belarus purports to be a democratic republic; however, it is in 
fact an autocratic regime ruled by Alyaksandr Lukashenka, who came to power in July 
1994. The State Department reports that, since 1994, “Lukashenka has consolidated 
power steadily in the executive branch through authoritarian means, destroying checks 
and balances and thereby dominating all branches of government.” 
 
 Under its constitution, citizens of Belarus have the right to vote, freedom of 
religion, and freedom of travel. The State Department’s Background Note on Belarus 
reports in detail how the Belarusian authorities under Lukashenka have severely 
curtailed and infringed upon its citizens’ ability to exercise all these constitutional rights, 
as well as workers’ rights, which also are specifically provided for by the Belarusian 
Constitution. 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 18-21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE1, 2; AE C, J. 
 
5 Tr. at 21-24, 32-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 18, 24, 28; GE 1; AE J. 
 
7 AE F-I, M. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Elections in 2006, 2010, 2012, and 2015 failed to meet international standards. 
Government restrictions on basic freedoms are also common throughout non-election 
periods. Belarusian authorities commit frequent, serious abuses in a system bereft of 
checks and balances. Belarus has made sales or delivery of weapons or weapons-
related technologies to states of concern, including state sponsors of terrorism such as 
North Korea, Syria, and Iran.  
 
 Naturalized U.S. citizens originally from Belarus may not automatically lose 
Belarusian citizenship upon naturalization and in the majority of cases retain Belarusian 
citizenship unless it is specifically renounced. 
 
 Belarusian security personnel may place foreigners under surveillance, including 
monitoring their hotel rooms, telephones, and fax machines, and searching their 
personal possessions in hotel rooms. American citizens have, in the past, been 
detained and jailed in Belarus. While incarcerated, Americans may be subject to abuse 
and beatings, and denied regular access to American Embassy officials.  
 
 According to the Department of Justice, there have been several recent criminal 
cases concerning international cybercrimes and arms exportation related to Belarus. In 
January 2016, a Belarusian national was extradited to the United States to face charges 
for an international cybercrime ring that netted $71 million by infecting computers with 
“scareware” and selling rogue antivirus software. In December 2015, a man was 
charged in connection with his efforts to purchase and export 89 sniper rifles from the 
United States to Belarus. In August 2015, two Belarusian citizens were charged for their 
participation in an international criminal conspiracy to steal banking and other 
credentials from infected computers. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s family members are citizens and residents of Belarus. Belarus is an 
autocratic regime with significant human rights problems. It has made sales or delivery 
of weapons or weapons-related technologies to states of concern, including state 
sponsors of terrorism such as North Korea, Syria, and Iran. Belarusian security 
personnel may place foreigners under surveillance. There have been several recent 
criminal cases concerning international cybercrimes and arms exportation related to 
Belarus. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been raised 
by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Belarus, but they are outweighed by 
his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. His wife, 
child, and brother-in-law are in the United States. His father was approved to immigrate 
to the United States, and he is likely living here by now. His mother is seeking to 
immigrate to the United States. There is no indication that Applicant’s family members 
and associates have direct ties to the Belarusian or Israeli governments. He has a good 
job and about $140,000 in savings and retirement accounts. He credibly stated that his 
allegiance lies with the United States and that he would report any attempt to use his 
family in Belarus against him.  
 
 I find it unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of the United States and the interests of the Belarusian 
government. There is no conflict of interest because Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s strong 
character evidence. His ties to Belarus are far outweighed by his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
8 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
