 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted]1 )  ISCR Case No. 15-06355 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 2, 2012. On 
March 11, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s name is incorrectly reflected in the SOR, and his first name and middle name were reversed 
in the transcript of the hearing. His name is correctly reflected in the caption of this decision. 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 15, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 11, 2016, 
and the case was assigned to me on July 20, 2016. On July 26, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for August 16, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open until August 31, 2016, to enable him to submit 
additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX K through P, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.n. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old database administrator employed by a defense 
contractor since September 2012. He served in the U.S. Army Reserve from January 
2004 to March 2007. He was on active duty in the U.S. Army from March 2007 to March 
2010, and then returned to the U.S. Army Reserve, serving from March 2010 to the 
present. He served in Iraq from March 2009 to February 2010. He received honorable 
discharges from his first tour of duty in the USAR and from his active-duty tour in March 
2010. He received a security clearance when he entered on active duty in 2007 (Tr. 8.) 
He has a 50% service-connected disability for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
(Exhibit C to SOR Answer; Tr. 82.) 
 
 Applicant married in May 2008. He and his wife have an eight-month-old 
daughter. He attended several college-level institutions from April 2009 to August 2012, 
and he has an associate’s degree in computer and information science. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began shortly after his father was diagnosed with 
terminal cancer and passed away in June 2006. Applicant moved to his father’s state of 
residence to be with him, and was able to continue working for the same employer. 
After his father’s death, he became seriously depressed and quit his job. He was 
unemployed for about a year. He lived in his mother’s basement during that time and let 
his unpaid bills accumulate. In March 2007, he enlisted in the Regular Army and served 
on active duty, seeking to have a regular source of income and to instill some discipline 
in his life. (SOR Answer at 2; Tr. 30-31.) 
 
 After Applicant left active duty, he read several financial planning publications 
that advocated ignoring old debts. When he applied for a loan to buy a home in 2014, 
the loan officer advised him to ignore his old debts until they dropped off his credit 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
report, because reviving them would hurt his credit score. (Tr. 46-47.) When he hired a 
lawyer to help him respond to the SOR, his lawyer advised him that he needed to take 
care of his old debts if he wanted to keep his security clearance. (Tr.32-33; SOR 
Answer at 2-3.) 
  
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling about $31,921. The delinquent 
debts are reflected in his credit bureau reports (CBRs) from November 2012 (GX 3), 
February 2015 (GX 4), and February 2016 (GX 5). The evidence concerning these 
debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, debt to U.S. Government agency, placed for collection in 
December 2013 for about $2,127. The debt arose from overpayment of veteran’s 
educational benefits due to inaccurate reporting of the number of classes he took. 
Applicant testified that he contacted the appropriate government agency to settle the 
debt, and he agreed to a voluntary garnishment of his pay. (Tr. 51-52.) About $1,399 
was collected by garnishment of Applicant’s pay in May and June 2015. (GX 2 at 11-
14.) He paid the remainder of the debt in two installments in April 2016, shortly after he 
received the SOR. (AX A.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, debt for $1,495, charged off in July 2008. This debt was cancelled 
by the creditor and reported on Applicant’s federal income tax return as income for tax 
year 2014. Applicant testified that he did not know why the debt was cancelled. (Exhibit 
F to SOR Answer; Tr. 54.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, debt for $759, charged off in September 2010. Applicant resolved 
the debt through a payment agreement and made his final payment in June 2016. (AX 
B; Tr. 55-56.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, deficiency after vehicle repossession, referred for collection in 
March 2009 for $14,526. Applicant testified that he voluntarily surrendered the vehicle 
when he could not afford the payments, and he replaced it with an old used vehicle. (Tr. 
31.) In April 2016, after he received the SOR, he sent a letter by certified mail to the 
creditor, asking how much the creditor received from the sale of the vehicle and how the 
deficiency was computed, and expressing his willingness to settle the debt. (AX O.) 
After he received an unresponsive reply, he called the creditor, but he still has not 
received the information he requested. (Tr. 58-61.) The debt is not resolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, credit-card account, charged off for $6,049 in February 2007. At 
the hearing, Applicant could not remember if he reached out to this creditor. (Tr. 61.) 
After the hearing, he submitted evidence that he sent a certified letter to the creditor in 
April 2016, and another certified letter on the day after the hearing. (AX N; AX O.) He 
has not received a response to his letters, and the debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f, telecommunications debt, placed for collection of $195 in 
February 2008. Applicant disputed this debt, and it was removed from his credit file as 
an erroneous charge. (AX C; Tr. 62-63.) 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g, department store debt, charged off for $413 in December 2007. 
Applicant contacted the creditor and was informed that his account was archived, that 
all information had been deleted, and that the creditor would not accept a payment. (AX 
G.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h, debt for $277, referred for collection in March 2008. In April 
2015, Applicant tried to send a certified letter to the creditor, but he sent it to an 
educational institution with the same acronym, and it was returned to him. (AX I; AX N.) 
He was unaware that the creditor’s contact information was listed in the November 2012 
CBR until it was pointed out by Department Counsel. (Tr. 64-65.) On the day after the 
hearing, he sent the letter to the address listed in the November 2012 CBR, and it was 
returned to him with a post office label stating, “No such number, unable to forward.” 
(AX L; AX N.) The debt is not yet resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i, credit-card account, placed for collection of $752. Applicant 
disputed this debt in July 2016, and the collection agency acknowledged receipt of his 
dispute. The dispute had not been resolved as of the date the record closed. (AX D.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j, credit-card account, placed for collection of $2,995 in October 
2012. In April 2016, Applicant sent a certified letter to the collection agency but it was 
returned by the postal service as undeliverable. His letter was not sent to the address 
reflected in his November 2012 CBR. He then called the telephone number reflected in 
the November 2012 CBR, and he disputed the debt on the ground that he had never 
purchased the computer for which the debt was listed. (AX K.) He received a letter from 
the collection agency acknowledging his dispute, and informing him that it was 
investigating the validity of the debt. (AX P.) The dispute is not yet resolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k, finance company debt, placed for collection of $1,609 in 
February 2010. In November 2015, Applicant received a settlement check for $151 
after the original creditor settled a complaint of engaging in unfair, deceptive, or abusive 
practices. (Answer to SOR; AX G; AX H.) The debt was listed in Applicant’s November 
2012 CBR, but it was not listed in his CBRs from February 2015, February 2016, and 
August 2016. (GX 4; GX 5; AX J.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l, cell phone account, placed for collection of $393 in December 
2006. Applicant settled this debt for about $90. The original creditor agreed not to 
pursue the remaining balance but will not restore service until the full amount is paid. 
(AX E.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m, telecommunications account, placed for collection of $194 in 
March 2006. Applicant paid this account in full in July 2016. (AX F.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n, insurance bill, placed for collection of $137 in September 2012. 
Applicant contacted the creditor and was informed that they could not find an account 
for him. (AX G.) The debt was listed in Applicant’s November 2012 CBR, but it was not 
listed in his CBRs from February 2015, February 2016, and August 2016. (GX 4; GX 5; 
 
5 
 
AX J.) Since less than seven years have elapsed since the debt was referred for 
collection, the deletion of the debt from Applicant’s credit record indicates that the debt 
was resolved.3 
 
 In response to DOHA financial interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal 
financial statement in June 2015. It reflected that his net income, including his spouse’s 
salary, was about $4,261; his monthly expenses were $2,684; his debt payment on his 
home mortgage loan was $1,550; and he had a net monthly remainder of $26. (GX 2 at 
15.) In April 2016, he completed a financial management course offered by a federal 
agency. (Exhibit E to SOR Answer.) In his answer to the SOR, he submitted an updated 
personal financial statement reflecting monthly family net income of $6,732, expenses 
and debt payments of $5,284, and a net monthly remainder of about $1,398. (Exhibit D 
to SOR Answer.) He recently received an increase in his gross annual salary from about 
$50,000 to about $85,000. (Tr. 39.) His wife earns about $30,000 per year. (Tr.71.) At 
the hearing, he estimated that his current net monthly remainder is now about $1,500. 
(Tr. 78.) 
 
 When Applicant answered the SOR, he submitted letters from his step-father 
(who has held a security clearance for 25 years), two fellow soldiers who served with 
him in Iraq, a former coworker, and three long-time friends. They describe him as 
honest, reliable, dedicated and responsible. They have watched him demonstrate 
initiative, generously help others in need, and strive to improve himself. He is 
considered a loyal friend, loving husband and father, and a person of exemplary 
character.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection or 
charged off that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute of limitations has 
run, which is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
6 
 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
7 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit bureau reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. The death of Applicant’s father was a 
circumstance beyond his control, but he voluntarily quit his job after his father’s death. 
There is no medical evidence in the record establishing the cause or severity of his 
 
8 
 
depression during the year after his father’s death. The service-connected disability for 
PTSD was the result of service in a combat zone. The record does not reflect whether 
he was more predisposed to PTSD as a result of his father’s untimely death. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Applicant completed a financial management course, 
and he has made significant strides in gaining control of his finances. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 
1.k-1.n. Even though debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h have not been paid, 
Applicant has made good-faith efforts to resolve them. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Applicant has a plan to systematically contact his creditors, verify the accuracy of the 
CBR information, and either pay the debts, establish a payment plan, or dispute them. 
 
 Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Except for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
Applicant did not begin to seriously address his delinquent debts until he consulted with 
a lawyer after receiving the SOR. His realization that his security clearance was in 
jeopardy undoubtedly was the catalyst for taking action. However, protecting his 
clearance was not his sole motivation. The evidence reflects that he was also motivated 
by his desire to put his life in order, act responsibly, and take care of his family.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j. In each 
case, Applicant questioned the basis for the debt and documented his dispute with 
letters to the creditors or collection agencies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He received a 
security clearance shortly after he began his active-duty Army service, before his year 
of financial irresponsibility began to affect his credit history. He was financially 
unsophisticated and made some unwise installment purchases while on active duty. He 
submitted his current SCA when he needed to obtain a higher level clearance, not 
realizing that his old debts would haunt him. He sought legal counsel when he received 
the SOR, and he has followed his lawyer’s advice and vigorously addressed his 
financial problems. While he has not resolved all his delinquent debts, he has a plan 
and has taken significant steps to implement it. He enjoys a reputation for reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. His employer has demonstrated confidence in him 
by sponsoring him for a higher-level clearance and giving him substantial pay raises. I 
am confident that he will continue to demonstrate financial responsibility and good 
judgment.4  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    For Applicant 
                                                          
4 Administrative judges do not have authority to grant conditional clearances. ISCR Case No. 99-0901, 
2000 WL 288429 at *3 (App. Bd. Mar.1, 2000). See also ISCR Case No. 01-24328, 2003 WL 21979745 
at *2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2003). However, applicants do not have a vested right to a security clearance. 
“The Government has the right to reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in 
light of more recent conduct having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). If Applicant does not continue his recent pattern of financial responsibility, he will be 
subject to reconsideration and possible revocation of his clearance. 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
