 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05305 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 17, 2014. On 
February 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 11, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 17, 2016, 
and the case was assigned to me on July 20, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 26, 2016, scheduling the hearing for 
August 15, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
 
2 
 
through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not 
present the testimony of any other witnesses and did not submit any documentary 
evidence. I kept the record open until August 31, 2016, to enable him to submit 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection.1 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 24, 
2016. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d-1.m. He 
denied SOR ¶ 1.c. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old help-desk technician employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2008. He has held a security clearance since January 2009. 
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. Army Reserve from April 1994 to April 2008 and was 
honorably discharged. He was employed in the private sector until he began his current 
job. He received an associate’s degree in networking and security management in 
October 2006 and a bachelor’s degree in computer science in May 2012. He estimates 
that he has about $110,000 in student loans. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 Applicant married in October 2005. He has two children, an eight-year-old 
daughter and a six-month-old son. (Tr. 21.)  
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts totaling about $82,817. The debts are 
reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) from September 2014 (GX 2) and 
June 2015 (GX 3). Applicant testified that the delinquent debts were the result of bad 
communication and lack of teamwork between him and his wife. (Tr. 20.) The evidence 
concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: second mortgage past due for $37,167, with a balance of 
$48,050. Applicant testified that he refinanced the first mortgage on his home around 
2008 or 2009. The payments on the first mortgage loan are current. He did not realize 
that the refinancing did not include the second mortgage loan. He was unaware that the 
second mortgage loan was delinquent until sometime after September 2014, when he 
checked his CBR. He testified that no liens were filed and no foreclosure proceedings 
initiated. He testified that he contacted the lender for the first mortgage loan, who could 
not explain why the second mortgage loan was not included in the refinancing. He 
testified that he contacted the holder of the second mortgage loan, who offered to settle 
the debt for $10,000. He did not offer any documentary evidence of the settlement offer. 
                                                          
1 AX C and D are photographs of documents in which only part of each document is copied, but enough 
information is visible to identify the information relevant to the SOR. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
 
3 
 
He hoped to borrow from his 401(k) retirement account to settle the debt, but he cannot 
obtain another loan from his 401(k) until he repays the loan he obtained to pay his 
daughter’s school tuition. (Tr. 36-43.) He considered making a hardship withdrawal from 
his 401(k) account, but decided that the tax consequences of an early withdrawal made 
this option imprudent. (Tr. 71.) After the hearing, he submitted evidence of another offer 
to settle the debt for an amount ranging from $20,896 to $25,076, based on the duration 
of the payment period. (AX C.) In his cover email, he stated that he was trying to 
negotiate a lower amount. (AX A.) As of the date the record closed, he had not 
accepted the offer or made any payments. The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b: credit card debt charged off for $20,434. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted evidence that the creditor offered to settle the debt for $8,173. (AX 
D.) As of the date the record closed, he had not accepted the offer or made any 
payments. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f-1.j: credit card debt charged off for $1,822; judgment for 
delinquent credit card balance, filed in February 2009 for $11,345; and credit card 
debts placed for collection of $2,504; $578; $420; and $1,773. Applicant has done 
nothing to resolve these debts. (Tr. 46, 50, 54-57.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: student loan past due for $968, with a balance of $5,645. 
Applicant testified that all his student loans are in deferment. (Tr. 21.) His CBRs reflect 
several student loans in deferment, but this student loan is reflected in his CBRs as past 
due. (GX 2 at 8; GX 3 at 2.) He testified that this debt was placed in forbearance in 
January 2016 until September 2016. He hoped to enroll in a master’s program in 
September 2016, which would place the loan in a deferred status. (AX A; Tr. 46-47.) As 
of the date the record closed, he had presented no evidence that the debt was deferred 
or in forbearance. The debt is unresolved. 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.e: delinquent car loan charged off for $5,184. Applicant testified that 
he bought a car for his wife, but only his name was on the loan. His wife agreed to make 
the payments, but she did not. The car was repossessed after the payments were past 
due for about three months. He has not done anything to resolve the debt. (Tr. 51-53.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.k-1.m: medical debts for $479, $121, and $22. Applicant has done 
nothing to identify the creditors or resolve these debts. (Tr. 57-58.) 
 
 Applicant testified that most of the debts alleged in the SOR were solely in his 
name, because his wife has a bad credit record. (Tr. 72.) He currently earns about 
$52,000 per year. On average, he earns about $3,000 in overtime pay, in addition to his 
base pay. (Tr. 29-31.) His wife is a registered nurse and earns about $80,000 per year. 
(Tr. 59.) Their daughter attends a private school where the tuition is $18,000 per year. 
Their daughter received a scholarship of $10,000 per year, and Applicant borrowed 
about $6,000 from his 401(k) retirement account in February 2016 to pay the balance of 
her tuition. (Tr. 43, 60-61.) As of August 29, 2016, he had $28,730 in his 401(k) 
 
4 
 
retirement account. (AX B.) Applicant testified that his net monthly remainder after 
paying all living expenses is between $1,500 and $2,000 per month. (Tr. 62.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 
5 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. The financial irresponsibility of Applicant’s 
wife was arguably a condition beyond his control, but it was facilitated by his decision to 
entrust her with credit cards, rely on her promise to make the payments on a new car in 
spite of her bad credit history, and his failure to monitor her spending. He contacted the 
creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, but only after he realized that his security 
clearance was in jeopardy. He has not accepted any settlement offers or made any 
payments on the debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not sought or received financial 
counseling, and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. This mitigating condition requires a showing of 
good faith. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant has not made any payments on the 
debts alleged in the SOR. He has negotiated with the lender of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
but has not reached an agreement or tendered any payments. He recently received a 
settlement offer for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, but he has not accepted it or made any 
payments. Thus far, he has made promises to pay, but no payments. A promise to pay 
a delinquent debt in the future is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a 
timely manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
7 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer for almost eight years, and he has 
held a security clearance for more than seven years. His financial problems are largely 
due to a dysfunctional relationship between him and his wife regarding family finances, 
his unwise decision to entrust his wife with credit cards and a car payment in spite of 
her bad credit history, and his decision to borrow money to send his daughter to an 
expensive private school instead of resolving other debts. It is not clear whether he and 
his wife have yet arrived at a workable partnership for the family finances. His intended 
solution for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b is to pay them by incurring more debt, i.e., 
a loan from his 401(k) account. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
