 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04216 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate both the personal conduct and financial 
considerations security concerns under Guidelines E and F, respectively. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 24, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On March 14, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
 
2 
 
 
it was received on March 31, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. The Government’s documents are identified as Items 1 through 8. 
Applicant provided documents within the time period. Applicant’s documents were 
marked as AE A through F. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, but 
did provide corrections in AE A, regarding biographical information. Both the 
Government’s and Applicant’s documents are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on September 20, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 2.a and 2.c. He 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e though 1.h, 2.b, and 2.d through 2.g. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He never married. He has an 18-year-old child. He 
earned an associate’s degree in 1995. He has been employed with his present 
employer, a federal contractor, since January 2013. He has been consistently employed 
by federal contractors since January 2007, except for two periods of unemployment 
from October 2006 to December 2006, and from October 2004 to February 2005.1 
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) in March 2014. In 
June 2014 and July 2014 he was interviewed by a government investigator as part of 
his background investigation. He was sent interrogatories in 2015 asking him to verify if 
the summaries of his personal subject interviews were correct. He responded to the 
interrogatories in December 2015, verifying their accuracy. The debts alleged in the 
SOR are supported by credit reports from March 2014, March 2015, and December 
2015.2 
 
 In February 2012, Applicant traveled for five days to a South American country 
for tourism. In May 2013, November 2013, and February 2014, Applicant traveled, each 
time for five days, to a Caribbean country for tourism.3 
 
 The SOR alleges unpaid medical debts in ¶ 1.a for $594; 1.b for $714; and 1.d 
for $801. On his March 2014 SCA, with regard to each of these debts, Applicant stated: 
“No action has been taken on this debt at this time. I’m [not] sure whether this debt is for 
services provided, a mistake, or not covered by insurance.” During his interview with a 
government investigator in June 2014, he indicated these debts were incurred in 2011, 
when he did not have medical insurance. He told the investigator that he did not know 
what he intended to do about the debts. In his February 2016 answer to the SOR, 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant admitted he owed these debts. In response to each debt he wrote: “I will work 
out a payment plan for this medical debt.” In his response to the FORM, Applicant 
stated: “For the medical items, I am currently and will continue to work to resolve these 
debts.”4 He has not provided proof he has paid or resolved these debts.  
 
 During his 2014 interview, Applicant acknowledged he had a delinquent 
mortgage on rental property he owned (SOR ¶ 1.c $81,224). He indicated that for a 
period of time he did not have a tenant and later when he did, the rent did not cover the 
mortgage and other fees associated with the property. He estimated he did not pay the 
mortgage for three years. He attempted to renegotiate the mortgage, obtain a 
modification, and enter into a short sale for the property with no success. In his answer 
to the SOR, he stated that the property was under contract for sale. In his response to 
the FORM, he indicated the property was sold, and he does not owe a balance. He 
provided a document supporting his assertion.5 
 
 Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶ 1.e though 1.h (amounts alleged 
respectively are $250, $100, $55 and $55). These accounts were in collection. During 
his 2014 interview, he admitted he owed these debts for parking fines, some that were 
doubled because he failed to timely pay them. He indicated he paid the debts. A March 
2014 credit report listed the debts as being in collection. Credit reports from March 2015 
and December 2015 did not list the debts. Applicant provided a copy of his record from 
his state’s department of motor vehicle, showing he does not owe any money. The 
unpaid alleged tickets were issued in a jurisdiction different from the state that issued 
his driver’s license.6  
 
 Applicant was arrested in July 2011 and charged with driving under the influence 
of alcohol (DUI), Refusal 1st, driving on a suspended license, and drive right side of 
highway. Applicant admitted this allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant explained during his 
interview that he did not disclose on his SCA that his license was suspended because 
the fine was less than $250. He admitted he was arrested and could not recall if he was 
given a citation that same night, but he was informed he had an outstanding ticket. He 
was given a field sobriety test, which he passed. He declined to take a breathalyzer. He 
indicated that about a month later he went to court and showed he had paid the overdue 
fine. He indicated he did not know he was charged with DUI. Because he is diabetic, he 
does not drink alcohol often. He told the investigator that he did not have other 
information about this incident. He explained in his response to the FORM that he did 
not disclose this arrest on his SCA because: 
 
I either misinterpreted the questions or did not provide a response 
because the way the question was worded a response was not required. 
For example section 22 under police record. The question is in the past 7 
                                                          
4 AE A. 
 
5 AE F. 
 
6 Items 3, 5, ,6, 7; AE A, B. 
 
4 
 
 
years have you been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in 
court in a criminal proceeding against you? (Do not check if all citations 
involve traffic infractions where the fine was less than $300.00 and did not 
include alcohol or drugs). Since there is only one place to check for all 
questions under this section I’m assuming do not check means for all of 
them. Also since the fine was only $181.00 and there wasn’t any alcohol 
or drugs involved I checked no for this question.7  
 
 The DUI and the other charges were nolle prosequi, except the charge for 
refusing to take a breathalyzer. Applicant was found guilty of that misdemeanor offense 
and was fined $181, which he paid. I find Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose 
this arrest plausible.8  
 
 SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that in March 2011 Applicant was terminated from 
employment because of a discrepancy in a laptop computer inventory. Applicant denied 
he was terminated, but stated he was “informed that my contract would not be 
renewed.”9 He explained that when he started working for this employer there was an 
ongoing investigation into missing laptops. Six or seven months later he was tasked 
with the responsibility of assigning laptops. There was no procedure in place. Sometime 
later his supervisor took inventory and discovered additional laptops were unaccounted 
for. After the inventory his supervisor spoke to him about the procedure for assigning 
and keeping track of laptops. Applicant told the government investigator he could not 
recall what his supervisor said to him. Shortly after the inventory, Applicant’s contract 
was terminated. He told the investigator he was not told why his contract was 
terminated, and he did not recall receiving any disciplinary action. Applicant indicated he 
did not disclose this information because he did not know he was terminated, but only 
thought his contract was not renewed.10 There is no independent evidence that explains 
what the reason was for Applicant’s contract termination.  
 
 In August 2008, Applicant was reprimanded while employed with a federal 
contractor, for unauthorized personal internet usage (SOR ¶ 2.c). Applicant admitted 
this allegation. During his background interview, he stated that he may have 
inadvertently left the internet open after having used it for business purposes, but he did 
not believe he was on the internet for personal use for three hours.11  
 
 In October 2006, Applicant was terminated from employment for sleeping during 
his shift (SOR ¶ 2.d). Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he was 
terminated from employment for sleeping, but disputed that he was sleeping on the job. 
                                                          
7 AE A. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Item 1. 
 
10 Item 3. 
 
11 Item 3. 
 
5 
 
 
During his background interview, Applicant explained that he was working the night shift 
at his job, and his supervisor thought he was sleeping on the job, so he was terminated. 
On his SCA, Applicant disclosed the reason he left this job was because: “[l]et go from 
the contract.”12 I find Applicant deliberately provided misleading information regarding 
his termination (SOR ¶ 2.g). 
 
 In September 2003, Applicant was terminated from employment for tardiness 
(SOR ¶ 2.e). During his background interview, Applicant indicated he did not believe he 
was late to work. He thinks his attendance was incorrectly reported. He indicated in his 
answer to the SOR that he was terminated from employment, but the reason was not 
due to tardiness. He believes the person who was making the report was angry with him 
so this person made inaccurate and fraudulent allegations against him.13  
 
 Applicant indicated in his response to the FORM that he has received several 
awards. He provided a certificate of appreciation from 1997 and another exemplary 
performance award that is undated. He also indicated that he has received several cash 
awards for his performance over the years.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
12 Items 2, 3. 
 
13 Items 1, 3 
 
14 AE A, C, D, E. 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.15 
 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant’s mortgage loan became delinquent sometime in 2011. He had unpaid 
parking tickets that were sent to a collection agency. He has delinquent medical bills 
from 2011 that are unpaid or resolved. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant failed to pay his mortgage loan for several years until it was finally 
resolved through a settlement agreement. He failed to pay parking tickets owed from 
2012, until the fines were doubled and sent to a collection agency. They are no longer 
on his credit report, so it appears they have been paid sometime in late 2014. He 
admitted he owed the three medical debts from 2011 when he did not have medical 
insurance. Despite repeated promises to resolve the medical debts, he has not. 
Applicant did not present evidence that his conduct occurred under circumstances that 
are unlikely to recur. His conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence to show his financial problems were largely 
beyond his control, and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant was 
financially able to take three vacations to foreign countries, but has failed to pay his 
 
8 
 
 
medical bills owed from 2011. His mortgage was delinquent for three years, despite 
having a tenant for part of the time. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. He has 
resolved his mortgage debt and the delinquent parking tickets, but failed to resolve the 
medical bills. There are not yet clear indications that his financial issues are being 
resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant settled his delinquent 
mortgage loan, presumably through a short sale. He paid his parking tickets, but not 
until after they were sent to a collection agency. His conduct does not constitute a good-
faith effort to pay overdue creditors. I find AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply, but acknowledge 
these debts are satisfied.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
9 
 
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
on his SCA that he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in a 
criminal proceeding; arrested by any police officer or charged, convicted, or sentenced 
for a crime in any court; or ever charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. 
Applicant’s explanation for why he did not disclose his July 2011 arrest on his SCA was 
because he did not believe the charge involved alcohol or drugs and the fine was under 
$300 is credible. I find he refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.f, regarding the falsification 
allegation. However, I considered that he was arrested and charged with DUI, Refusal 
1st, driving on a suspended license, and drive right side of highway. Applicant was found 
guilty of the misdemeanor for his breathalyzer refusal. (SOR ¶ 2.a) I find AG ¶¶ 16(c) 
and 16(e) apply. 
 
I find there is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant was terminated from 
employment in March 2011 due to his conduct. Applicant disputes he was terminated, 
and there is no independent evidence to support the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b. There is 
sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant was terminated from his employment in 
October 2006 for sleeping during his shift, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d. He was aware he 
was terminated and deliberately provided false or misleading information on his SCA, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.g.16 AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
Applicant was reprimanded by an employer for unauthorized use of the internet in 
2008. He was terminated from his job in 2003 for tardiness. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) 
apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct he omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant made good-faith efforts 
to correct his falsification before being confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(a) does not 
apply. Applicant has a history of inappropriate conduct at work that has led to being 
                                                          
16 Both SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.d were alleged under ¶ 2.g. I have only considered the falsification regarding 
the ¶ 2.d allegation. 
 
10 
 
 
reprimanded or terminated in 2003, 2006, and 2008. He was arrested in 2011 and found 
guilty of a misdemeanor. Applicant’s behavior raises questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶¶ 17(c) 
or 17(d).   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old man who has been steadily employed except for two 
periods in 2006, and a part of 2005 and 2004. He has resolved some of his delinquent 
debts, but despite repeated promises to pay his medical bills, he has not. He did not pay 
his parking fines until after they were sent to a collection agency. He has a history of 
problems at work that led to a reprimand and termination. He deliberately was 
misleading when he completed his SCA regarding his termination from a job. I 
considered the information Applicant provided regarding awards he received in the past; 
however, that information does not outweigh his pattern of misconduct and failure to 
resolve financial obligations. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under guideline F, financial considerations and guideline E, 
personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
