 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08031 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) The Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On  
February 8, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 19, 2016. She admitted six and denied 
one (SOR 1.b) allegation of delinquent debt with explanations. She elected to have the 
matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on February 22, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on March 17, 2016, and she was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on 
September 27, 2016.   
   
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file. I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 54 years old and a high school graduate. She was first married in 
September 1985 and divorced in February 1986. She married again in October 1990. 
He husband passed away in October 2014. She has two children. She was employed 
as a trainer/supervisor for a supply company from January 1999 until July 2006. She 
was unemployed from July 2006 until August 2007. There is no indication in the file if 
she received unemployment compensation during this period of unemployment. She 
started working for her present defense contractor employer in August 2007. She 
reported on her e-QIP that at one time while working for the defense contractor she was 
eligible for access to classified information at the confidential level. (Item 2, e-QIP, 
dated March 5, 2015) 
 
Applicant listed her delinquent debts on the e-QIP. The SOR alleged and credit 
reports (Item 3, dated September 8, 2007 and April 4, 2015; Item 4, dated October 16, 
2015; and item 5, dated January 14, 2016 and March 16, 2016) confirm the following 
delinquent debts for Applicant: a debt for a credit card placed for collection for $2,051 
(SOR 1.a); a delinquent medical account in collection for $676 (SOR 1.b); a department 
store account charged off for $8,515 (SOR 1.c); a department store account charged off 
for $452 (SOR 1.d); a credit card account in collection for $9,671 (SOR 1.e); a credit 
card account charged off for $5,823 (SOR 1.f); and a credit card account charged off for 
$3,584 (SOR 1.g). The amount of the delinquent debt listed in the SOR is approximately 
$30,000. All of the debts are listed on the credit reports.  
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant noted that she and her husband had good 
credit and paid their bills until he was required to retire because of his health. The only 
income was her salary. She and her husband had a difficult time being current with their 
finances on only her income. She lost over two months of work without pay because of 
her own illness and other issues. When she was not working, they had no income. Her 
husband died in 2014. Applicant admitted to all of the SOR debts except for the medical 
debt for $676 at SOR 1.b. She professed to making payments on the credit card 
accounts at SOR 1.a and 1.e but provided no documents to verify the payments. She 
received an offer for a payment plan on the store credit card at SOR 1.d, but she has 
not accepted or made any payments towards the debt. She has not presented any 
documents to verify that she made payments on any of the debts. (Item 1, SOR 
response, dated February 19, 2016) 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
 
4 
 
 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person 
may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts 
as documented in her credit reports and her response to the allegations in the SOR. All 
of Applicant’s SOR debts are listed on the credit reports at Items 3, 4 and 5. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG 
¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The information raises both an 
inability and an unwillingness to pay delinquent debt. Once the Government has 
established delinquent debt, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate 
those debts. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. She is a widow 
who had difficulties paying the family debts after her husband became ill and had to 
retire. She was the sole source of income. She also had some periods when she was ill, 
could not work, and not receiving income. While these conditions were potentially 
beyond her control, she has not acted responsibly. She was aware that her financial 
problems were a security concern when she completed her e-QIP in March 2015. She 
has been gainfully employed since August 2007. She has not presented any evidence 
that she made payments on any of her debts. She has not presented information to 
verify actions taken to learn about, resolve, and pay her delinquent debts. The evidence 
does not support responsible management of her finances and her financial problems 
are not under control. Based on Applicant’s failure to establish she made arrangements 
or payments on her debts, it is clear that she has not been reasonable and responsible 
in regard to her finances. Her lack of reasonable and responsible action towards her 
finances is a strong indication that she may not protect and safeguard classified 
information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant is a 
widow since 2014. Even though Applicant has been gainfully employed since August 
2007, she did not provide sufficient credible documentary information to establish that 
she has taken reasonable and responsible action to resolve her financial problems. 
Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of her finances and a 
 
6 
 
 
consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. She has not established her suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from her financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
