   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-02198 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David H. Leroy, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) includes 17 allegations of delinquent 
debts totaling $75,927 and dismissal of a Chapter 13 Bankruptcy filing in 2011. While 
circumstances beyond his control damaged his finances, he did not show enough 
progress paying his debts to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. He 
disclosed his bankruptcy; however, he unintentionally failed to disclose his delinquent 
debts on his August 21, 2014 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(e-QIP) or security clearance application (SCA). Personal conduct security concerns 
were not established. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On August 21, 2014, Applicant completed and signed his SCA. (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
   
 
2 
 
 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). 
 
On December 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On July 15, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On July 25, 2016, the case was assigned to 
me. On September 14, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for September 20, 2016. (HE 1) The 
hearing was conducted using video teleconference. Applicant waived his right under the 
Directive to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. (Tr. 12-13) 
His hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered 
eight exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 20-22; 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1-5; Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1-8) On September 28, 2016, 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations except for 
the allegation in SOR ¶ 2(a). He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old network operations critical situation manager, where 
he has worked for his employer since 2010. (Tr. 23, 27-28; GE 1) He does not have 
access to classified information in his current employment; however, a security 
clearance is required for employment under the DOD contract. (Tr. 27, 41-42) In 1986, 
he married, and in 2001, he divorced. (Tr. 81) In 2004, he married. (Tr. 23) His spouse 
has three children, and Applicant has two adult children from prior relationships. (Tr. 23) 
He does not have a criminal record; he does not abuse illegal drugs; and there is no 
evidence of security violations. (Tr. 24; GE 1)  
 
In 1998, Applicant was honorably retired as a staff sergeant (E-5) after 20 years 
of U.S. Air Force service. (Tr. 24-25) When he was in the Air Force, he held a high-level 
security clearance. (Tr. 27) From 1998 to 2006, he worked as a personal computer 
technician for the water company. (Tr. 25) He returned to college from 2006 to 2009, 
and he received a bachelor’s degree in information systems technology. (Tr. 24, 26)    
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s spouse was employed as a nurse, and from about 2005 to about 
2010, her annual salary with per diem when traveling was about $80,000. (Tr. 29, 59-
60) The total annual family income in 2009 was about $120,000. (Tr. 72) In 2010, she 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
   
 
3 
 
 
injured her ankle at work. (Tr. 30-31, 63) She had eight corrective surgeries that were 
not able to return her to full mobility. (Tr. 31-32) In February 2012, she was released 
from her employment, and she began receiving $1,600 monthly in workers’ 
compensation. (Tr. 33) Applicant’s spouse is currently receiving Social Security 
disability of about $1,500 monthly. (Tr. 34) Her injury caused their income to be reduced 
by half, and their medical bills totaled about $40,000. (Tr. 32) He said he made 
payments on medical bills, kept his mortgage current, brought his student loans to 
current status, and paid off the lien on a vehicle. (Tr. 32, 65-66) They have reduced the 
balance on a credit card from $10,000 to $1,100. (Tr. 35) His spouse’s workers’ 
compensation claim is pending, and if it is successful, Applicant intends to use the 
proceeds to pay off his debts. (Tr. 35) 
 
 In 2014, Applicant’s spouse’s daughter had a difficult pregnancy, and she spent 
about 90 days in a hospital. (Tr. 37) Applicant provided financial support to her. (Tr. 37) 
She is currently disabled. (Tr. 37) They are also providing financial assistance to his 
spouse’s son, who currently lives with Applicant and his spouse. (Tr. 37)  
   
 Applicant’s current annual salary is $46,000. (Tr. 27) He received three pay 
raises after 2010, and his pay increased from $11.50 an hour to $22.50 an hour. (Tr. 57) 
His former spouse receives 30 percent of his Air Force retired pay, and he receives the 
other 70 percent. (Tr. 58) He receives $300 monthly from the Department of Veterans 
Affairs for his service-connected disability. (Tr. 59) Applicant obtained a September 11, 
2016 Equifax credit report which shows that most of the SOR debts no longer appear on 
his credit report. (Tr. 51; AE 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges in July 2011, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy; in August 
2011, he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy; and in September 2011, the Chapter 13 
bankruptcy was dismissed. Applicant believed he was ineligible for a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, and it was prudent to shift to a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (Tr. 64) Applicant 
said the bankruptcy was dismissed because he did not want to use bankruptcy to get 
out of paying his debts. (Tr. 36, 63-65; AE 2) The Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed 
before he made any payments. (Tr. 83)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a timeshare repossession debt for $24,448.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a department store collection debt for $11,919. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d to 1.i, 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, 1.p, 1.r allege 11 bank collection debts for 
$5,565; $5,441; $5,376; $4,740; $4,347; $3,632; $1,715; $1,577; $1,288; $774; and 
$375. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.k, and 1.n allege three collection debts from unspecified sources 
for $1,840; $866; and $1,524. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.q alleges a collection debt from a gym membership for $500. 
   
 
4 
 
 
Applicant did not make any payments to address any of the debts in the 
statement of reasons. (Tr. 66-68) Some of the SOR debts have been delinquent since 
2010. (Tr. 70, 74-76; AE 8 at 3, 5, 8) On several debts, Applicant did not maintain 
contact with the creditors. (Tr. 67-69) He said he made some attempts to set up 
payment plans; however, he does not have any payment plans arranged with any of the 
SOR creditors. (Tr. 66-70)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant was under pressure to get his August 21, 2014 SCA completed, and 
his employer set a deadline for its submission. (Tr. 38-43) He was unable to obtain 
access to his SCA because of technical difficulties for several days. (Tr. 38-40) He also 
had to collect information to complete his SCA. (Tr. 42-43) He worked all night to 
complete his SCA. By the time he began the financial portion of his SCA, he was 
exhausted, and it was about 4:00 a.m. (Tr. 43) Section 26, Financial Record, of 
Applicant’s SCA asks in the past seven (7) years: 
 
Have you filed a petition under any chapter of the bankruptcy code? Have 
you had any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily 
repossessed or foreclosed? Have you had any bills or debts turned over to 
a collection agency? Have you had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? Have you been over 
120 days delinquent on any debt(s)? Are you currently over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?   
 
 Applicant answered “yes” to the bankruptcy question and disclosed that he filed 
for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Code in 2011. (Tr. 44, 76-
77) More than 18 debts were listed on his Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. (Tr. 85-86) He 
answered “no” to the other financial questions, and he failed to disclose any of the 17 
delinquent debts listed in the previous section. He was aware that the Government 
would check his bankruptcy and credit reports and would learn about his financial 
problems. (Tr. 44-45, 48) He mistakenly marked “no” in his answers about debts in 
collections, cancelled credit cards, delinquent debts, and repossessed properties. (Tr. 
47) He read the questions; he was aware he had debts in collections; and conceded his 
answers were not accurate. (Tr. 47-48, 79-80) He was tired after working all night on his 
SCA, and he missed the mistake in the financial section. (Tr. 44-50) His failure to 
provide accurate and complete financial information was unintentional and not designed 
to deceive the Government. (Tr. 56) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Three of Applicant’s current managers and a manager where he was previously 
employed provided character statements. (AE 3-AE 6) The general sense of Applicant’s 
four character statements is that Applicant is honest, responsible, diligent, dedicated, 
and trustworthy. He shows leadership, has integrity, and possesses an excellent 
reputation. These four statements support continuation of his security clearance.     
   
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
   
 
6 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
   
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant presented some important mitigating information. Several 
circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances. In 2010, Applicant’s 
spouse was hurt at work, and the family income was reduced by half. They also had 
medical bills. He provided support for two of his spouse’s children. However, he did not 
provide enough specifics about how these circumstances adversely affected his 
finances, and he did not show that he acted responsibly to address his delinquent SOR 
debts during the last three years when he had stable employment, and he should have 
been acclimated to his spouse’s reduction in income.       
 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
   
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s decision to file for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy 
Code in 2011 does not establish any disqualifying conditions, and SOR ¶ 1.a is 
mitigated. He is not credited with mitigating the other SOR debts because he did not 
provide any documentation showing progress paying the debt or a reasonable dispute 
of any debts, such as copies of letters to the SOR creditors and credit reporting 
companies disputing his responsibility for any debts. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why he was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving any of his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance 
that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in 
the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,   
. . . determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . . ; and  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 Applicant unintentionally failed to disclose his delinquent debts on his August 21, 
2014 SCA. He disclosed his 2011 bankruptcy filing on his SCA, and it was obvious that 
he had serious financial problems. Bankruptcy filings are readily available to the 
Government through the Pacer system. Applicant was not attempting to conceal his 
financial problems or deceive the Government. The allegation that he knowingly and 
intentionally made a false statement on his August 21, 2014 SCA is not substantiated. 
Personal conduct security concerns are not established. 
 
  
   
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old network operations critical situation manager, where 
he has worked for his employer since 2010. In 1998, Applicant was honorably retired as 
a staff sergeant after 20 years of Air Force service. In 2009, he received a bachelor’s 
degree in information systems technology. The general sense of Applicant’s four 
character statements is Applicant is honest, responsible, diligent, dedicated, and 
trustworthy. He shows leadership, has integrity, and possesses an excellent reputation. 
These statements support reinstatement of his security clearance. He does not have a 
criminal record; he does not abuse illegal drugs; and there is no evidence of security 
violations. Applicant is credited with mitigating the bankruptcy allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
He is also credited with mitigating the allegation that he intentionally falsified his August 
21, 2014 SCA. 
 
The disqualification evidence is more persuasive. Applicant has a lengthy history 
of delinquent debt. In his SOR response, Applicant admitted responsibility for 17 
delinquent debts totaling $75,927. Applicant did not provide enough specifics about how 
circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances;3 he did not provide 
copies of his tax returns, which would have documented his changes in income; he did 
not show that he acted responsibly to address his delinquent debts; he did not show 
how he reduced his expenses to conform with his reduction in income; he did not 
provide a current budget; he did not provide documentation showing a reasonable 
                                            
3 He described his spouse’s injury, and said he and his spouse’s income declined by 50 percent. 
He said there were $40,000 in medical bills. He did not provide corroborating documentation. As an Air 
Force retiree, he would have had TRICARE coverage to pay most of his whatever medical expenses not 
covered by his spouse’s insurance.  
   
 
10 
 
 
dispute of any SOR debts; he did not provide documented payment histories of non-
SOR debts such as his mortgage, student loans, vehicle lien, and credit card accounts; 
and he admitted he did not make any payments to any of his SOR creditors. His failure 
to make greater progress resolving his SOR debts shows lack of financial responsibility 
and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, 
financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at 
this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.r:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
  
   
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
