1  
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )                  ISCR Case No.: 15-06603     
  )                
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
April 9, 2015. On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence.2 
 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2  
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 12, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on February 1, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns.  Applicant received the FORM on February 5, 2016. He did not file a 
response to the FORM within the time allowed, nor did he assert any objections to the 
Government’s evidence. 
 
The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2016. The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 3) are admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
    Procedural Ruling 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning China and India. Department 
Counsel provided supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the 
requested facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of Fact. The 
Government’s request and the supporting background documents are re- marked as 
hearing exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of 
notice used for administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or derived from government 
reports.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s spouse and stepdaughter are citizens of China, his 
in-laws are residents and citizens of China, and his parents are residents and citizens of 
India. He is also alleged to have traveled to India. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted all the factual allegations, however noted that his mother-in-law passed away 
in 2015 (SOR 1.c). 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old software engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2015. He was born in India, immigrated to the United States in 1982 and 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2000. He attended an American university and 
graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 1993. He was previously granted a security 
clearance in 2006. Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His father is a 
retired foreign bank executive and his mother is not employed. Applicant has weekly 
                                                     
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice). 
3  
contact by phone and annual contact in person with his parents. At the time of his 
background investigation, Applicant had traveled to India in 2009 and 2011. 
 
Applicant married a Chinese national in 2010, whom he met in approximately 
2004. He reported that she was born in China in 1970 and is listed on the SF 86 as a 
U.S. registered alien, but the date of entry, circumstances of their meeting, and her ties 
to China are not provided in the record. Applicant has a stepchild, born in China in 
1996. Applicant sponsored her entry into the United States in 2012 because he and his 
spouse wanted her to be closer to her mother while she attended high school. She is 
now 20 years old, but her current residency, immigration status, and ties to China are 
not available in the record. Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired Chinese business 
executive. He stated that he has not met his father-in-law, and only spoke to him once. 
His mother-in-law passed shortly before issuance of the SOR. 
 
China is the most aggressive collector of U.S. economic information and 
technology. China’s intelligence service, private companies and other entities frequently 
seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their 
insider access to corporate or governmental networks to steal sensitive or classified 
information. The Chinese government has conducted large-scale cyber espionage 
against the United States and compromised a range of U.S. networks. Additionally, 
China’s communist government represses and coerces organizations and individuals 
involved in civil and political rights advocacy, ethnic minorities and law firms 
representing individuals involved in sensitive cases. The government regularly violates 
the individual and human rights of its citizens, and surveils and monitors foreign visitors 
to China without their knowledge or consent. 
 
India is a multi-party, federal, parliamentary democracy. The president, elected 
by an electoral college, is the chief of state and the prime minister is the head of the 
government. Recent elections were generally considered free and fair. However, India 
is among the most active countries involved in economic and industrial espionage. They 
are also among the most active in U.S. trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy. 
India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect U.S. 
citizens, especially in the Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir. Anti-western terrorist 
groups are active in India, including Islamist extremist groups that target public places 
frequented by westerners. Indian police and security forces are known for human rights 
abuses including extrajudicial killings, torture, rape, corruption and other abuses. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
4  
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
5  
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The Applicant’s spouse and stepdaughter, are Chinese citizens. His father-in-law 
is a citizen and resident of China. His parents are citizens and residents of India. 
Applicant has traveled to India to visit his parents. 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Three disqualifying conditions under this AG ¶ 7 are relevant: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections  to  a  foreign  person,  group,  government,  or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
6  
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. I am satisfied that the intelligence collection 
activities and human rights abuses by India and China are sufficient to establish the 
“heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, 
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant has close and continuing ties of affinity to his spouse and 
stepdaughter. He sponsored his stepdaughter for U.S. resident status. His father-in-law 
is a retired Chinese business executive who is a citizen and resident of China. Although 
Applicant stated that he has little contact with his father-in-law, his spouse and 
stepdaughter’s relationship is unknown. Additionally, since Applicant requested a 
clearance decision without a hearing, I am unable to inquire into his spouse’s and 
stepdaughter’s ties to China. I do not know when and how his spouse entered the 
7  
United States, how Applicant and his spouse met and their relationship before marrying, 
her education and employment background, and the extent of her personal ties to 
China. I also do not know the circumstances surrounding his stepdaughter’s life in 
China and entry into the United States, and her current immigration status. Mitigating 
condition ¶ 8(a) applies to Applicant’s ties to India, but no mitigation is warranted 
regarding his ties to China. Travel to a foreign country may be a factor to consider in 
Guideline B cases, but is not an independent disqualifying condition. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  In applying the whole- 
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family connections to 
China. Accordingly, overall I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c and 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
