                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-00285
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
October 18, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated June 30, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On September 18, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on October 16, 2015, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
December 4, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on December 10, 2015.  Applicant
was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days
of receipt.  Applicant did not submit a reply to the FORM.  This case was assigned to
the undersigned on September 13, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 26 years old and unmarried.  He has a Bachelor’s degree.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as a Software Engineer.  He is applying for a security
clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s
Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant graduated from high school in June 2010, and then from
college in September 2013.  He has been working for his current employer since
December 2013.  He has never held a security clearance.
Applicant has a history of illegal drug use that includes injectable steroids without
a prescription, marijuana, and ecstacy.  Applicant stated that in April 2013 and in May
2014, he purchased an eight week course of injectable steroids for the purposes of
gaining muscle mass.  He paid approximately $300 for the steroids on each occasion. 
He believes the steroids had no effects on his personality or behavior and that since he
is using them safely and responsibly there is no danger in the use.  
In May or June 2011, he also used ecstacy in pill form, once at a social gathering
in college and the other one at a night club.  The pills were given to him by a friend.  He
states that the ecstasy pills made him feel good and relaxed.  He states that he used it
for experimental purposes and decided to stop using it on his own.  (Government
Exhibit 5.)
From February 2011 to October 2013, Applicant used marijuana on
approximately ten occasions at various social events on campus.  On each occasion he
injested about four inhalations from a marijuana cigarette or pipe.  He states that the
marijuana made him relaxed and silly.  Applicant was always given the marijuana he
used and never had to purchase it.  He did not feel that he was dependent on the drug.   
When asked in his security clearance application dated June 30, 2014, what his
future intentions about illegal drug use were, Applicant stated, “I don’t really care about
it one way or the other.  I felt no need or desire to take any.”  (Government Exhibit 3.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
2
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse; and
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18 - 19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
3
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in illegal drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant. 
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of
the SOR.  
Applicant’s history of illegal drug use that began in 2011 and continued until at
least 2014 shows poor judgment and unreliability.  Applicant does not state that he is
opposed to recreational drug use, in fact he states that he experimented with the
drugs, and they helped him to relax.  This recent use of illegal drugs call into question
his maturity, character, judgment, and ability to abide by the law.    
4
Applicant’s behavior and attitude is inconsistent with being cleared for access to
classified information.  His conduct shows extreme immaturity and raises serious
security concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness.  Under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse; and 25.(c) illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia apply.  None of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.     
   I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  He has not earned the privilege of
holding a security clearance.  There is no mitigating evidence in the record.  There is
no clear indication from the Applicant whether he will continue to use illegal drugs in
the future or not.  I am not convinced by his statement “I don’t really care about it one
way or the other.  I feel no need or desire to take any,” that he will not continue to use
illegal drugs in the future.  He has not demonstrated the level of maturity, and
responsibility, expected of an employee who works for the defense industry and has
access to classified information.  He has not shown a pattern of following rules and
regulations.  In fact, he has violated the law and DoD policy, which prohibits illegal drug
use.  Applicant’s past illegal drug use is a clear indicator of poor judgment and
unreliability that preclude him from security clearance eligibility at this time.
  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must be determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest.  Based upon the conduct outlined here, Applicant
has fallen short of this requirement.  He has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy,
and he does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.     
 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
5
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
6
