  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-05067
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Erin M. Estevez, Esq.
Thomas O. Mason, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems and by
his failure to timely file federal and state income taxes as required. His request for a
security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On July 17, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue to receive a security
clearance.  1
On December 18, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for2
 At Department Counsel’s request, I have included, as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1, a copy of the March 8, 20163
letter that forwarded Gx. 1 - 4 to Applicant, in accordance with Directive Section E3.1.13. Also included, as
Hx. 2, is a list identifying those exhibits.
 No dollar amount was specified for the debt alleged at SOR 1.e.4
2
financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer)
and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to an administrative judge on March
20, 2016, and a hearing was scheduled for April 14, 2016. One week before the
hearing, Applicant requested a continuance. The request was granted, and the case
was transferred to me on May 18, 2016. I convened a hearing on June 30, 2016. The
parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits
(Gx.) 1 - 4.  Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) 1 - 18. Two3
witnesses testified for Applicant. A transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on July
14, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant did not timely file his
federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 - 2012 (SOR 1.a); that he did not timely
file his state income tax returns for 2010 - 2012 (SOR 1.b); and that he owed at least
$57,486  for 11 delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.c - 1.m). In response, Applicant4
admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR allegations (Answer). In addition to the facts
established through Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 35 years old and works for a defense contractor in a job for which he
was hired in August 2009. His work requires eligibility for access to classified
information. From April 2002 until April 2010, Applicant served in the United States
Army on active duty and in the Army Reserve. He has held a security clearance without
interruption since September 2002. (Gx. 1; Tr. 17 - 19)
Applicant got married in June 2009, but he and his wife separated just two
months later. They have one child together and neither party has initiated formal divorce
proceedings. In 2007, Applicant bought a house in State A in which he and his wife lived
until they separated. Applicant remained in the house after his wife and child moved out,
but relocated to State B for work in April 2010. The house remained empty until early
2011, when he rented out the house. The tenant paid him a security deposit and the first
month’s rent, but never paid rent after moving in. She also did not properly care for the
property and extensive damage ensued. Applicant tried on several occasions to have
the tenant evicted. However, Applicant had rented out the house without first registering
it as a rental property as required by local ordinances, a requirement of which he was
previously unaware. Because the property was not registered, Applicant could not
legally evict his tenant and reclaim the property. Applicant’s tenant knew this because
she was an employee of the city’s housing authority, and she refused to leave the
property for two years. His efforts to seek relief from the city in the form of eviction
assistance or retroactive property registration were unsuccessful. Once the tenant did
leave, it became apparent he could not afford to repair the structural damage left
behind. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 32 - 35)
Since April 2010, Applicant has been living and working in State B, and he had
hoped to use rent revenues to cover the mortgage on his home in State A. He started
communicating with the mortgage lender (identified in SOR 1.c) in 2011 in the hopes of
obtaining a mortgage modification or approval for a short sale. But the bank did not
3
work with Applicant because he was not far enough in arrears. He was able to use
savings to make some mortgage payments and defray the losses from his lack of rental,
but he made his last mortgage payment sometime in 2012. Ultimately, the mortgage
was foreclosed. Applicant received an IRS 1099-A (Acquisition or Abandonment of
Property) form showing that the fair market value of the home when the mortgage was
foreclosed was $45,000, but the remaining mortgage at the time was about $100,000.
He has not yet received an IRS 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt). He will have to declare a
yet to be determined  portion of the remaining mortgage as taxable income, but he does
not have any remaining obligation to pay the mortgage. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. 13;
Tr. 34 - 35, 58 - 64, 71)
Applicant also did not timely file his federal or state income tax returns as
required for the 2009 - 2012 tax years. He attributed his conduct in this regard to a
combination of procrastination, a general lack of motivation after he and his wife
separated, an inability to gather his W-2 forms and other necessary documents after he
moved to State B, and in one instance, a lack of documentation after a previous
employer went out of business. Applicant also attributed his procrastination to his belief
that he would receive refunds for the years he did not file. He has always claimed zero
exemptions from withholding so he was sure he would pay enough tax each year. He
testified at hearing, however, that he understood at all times that he was required to
meet his tax filing obligations. Applicant has since hired an accountant and all of his
past-due federal and state returns have been filed. He is in repayment plans for the
2009 and 2010 tax years, and refunds from the remaining tax years have been diverted
and applied to those years for which he owed taxes. Available information shows
Applicant is again in good standing as to his federal and state income tax obligations.
(Answer; Ax. 2 - 12; Tr. 46 - 50, 52 - 58, 64 - 65, 69 - 70)
Applicant also accrued several smaller debts after the end of his marriage and
during his relocation. The debt at SOR 1.d is for an overpayment of tuition by the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) while Applicant was studying at a community
college in State B. It became delinquent because he was away on extended temporary
duty for work when the bill arrived. He paid the SOR 1.d debt in April 2015. The debts at
SOR 1.e - 1.h, and 1.l are for cable, cell phone, home security system, and utility bills
Applicant either was late in paying or did not receive final billing after moving to State B.
SOR 1.i - 1.k are unpaid medical co-payments related to his son. SOR 1.m is for a
speeding ticket issued from a traffic camera system. Applicant also did not receive it
before he moved. With the exception of SOR 1.e, Applicant paid most of those debts in
September 2013. SOR 1.h and 1.k were paid in April 2015 and January 2016,
respectively. Applicant has been unable to verify information about the debt alleged at
SOR 1.e. It remains unresolved. (Answer; Ax. 13 - 18; Tr. 36 - 48)
Applicant’s current finances are sound. He lives modestly and within his means.
After paying all of his regular monthly expenses and ongoing tax debt and other
payments, he has almost $4,000 remaining each month. His monthly expenses also
include $600 child support payments. He is using his remaining money to rebuild his
savings and accelerate repayment of his tax debts. A former co-worker, fellow soldier,
and current roommate who has known Applicant for ten years testified that Applicant
lives responsibly and is trustworthy and reliable. He also has observed Applicant’s
handling of classified information, and reports Applicant is conscientious and shows
good judgment in that capacity. Another witness, with whom Applicant worked on a
previous contract and who recommended Applicant be hired for his current position,
regards Applicant as professional and trustworthy. He also has observed that Applicant
handles classified information properly. Both witnesses recommended Applicant be
 See Directive, 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
4
granted a clearance despite the adverse financial information in his background.
(Answer; Tr. 51 - 52, 65 - 68, 72 - 73, 75 - 76, 79 - 103)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.8
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant did not timely file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years
2009 - 2012. He also incurred significant unpaid debts through past-due taxes, his
default on the mortgage for his house in State A, and ten other smaller past-due or
delinquent debts. The foregoing requires application of the disqualifying conditions at
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations); and AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or
local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The circumstances underlying Applicant’s mortgage foreclosure were largely
beyond his control. The Government has suggested that Applicant engaged in a
strategic default on his mortgage obligation. (Tr. 103) I disagree. Strategic default is a
deliberate decision by a borrower, who is still able to pay for a property that is otherwise
viable, but who also has determined or been advised that continued performance no
longer is in his or her best financial interest. In other words, the borrower no longer likes
the deal he made. That did not occur here. Applicant tried to carry his mortgage as best
he could despite his tenant’s malfeasance. But he was unable to pay after a certain
point in 2012. He eventually was left with a damaged property that he could neither
repair nor sell. Also contributing to Applicant’s dilemma was the mortgage lender’s
unwillingness to work with him to either modify the mortgage or to agree to a short sale.
At worst, the foreclosure will result in debt forgiveness by the mortgage lender that will
6
be declared as taxable income. This aspect of Applicant’s financial problems arose
through circumstances beyond his control. His response to those circumstances does
not reflect adversely on his judgment and reliability. I conclude from all of the foregoing
that AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) apply to SOR 1.c.
As to SOR 1.d - 1.m, Applicant provided sufficient information to support his
claims that they became delinquent around the time he was moving to State B and that
he was unaware they were due. He paid most of them in September 2013, and with one
exception, he has resolved all of those debts. I conclude AG ¶¶ 20(a) - 20(d) apply to
SOR 1.d - 1.m.
As to Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state income taxes from 2009 -
2012, he has acknowledged that it was not proper for him to ignore his responsibilities
in this regard. His explanations for not timely filing his returns are based on a mixture of
understandable upheaval in his personal life and unacceptable procrastination. It was
not until after the SOR was issued that Applicant filed his past-due returns and brought
his filing status current. Nonetheless, in view of the positive information about his
current finances, as well as his overall judgment and reliability, I conclude Applicant is
not likely to again fail in his income tax reporting obligations or to incur new delinquent
debts. On balance, available information is sufficient to support application of the
mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(a) - (d) to SOR 1.a and 1.b.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is an honorably-discharged Army veteran who has continued to
support Army missions through his civilian employment. Personal and professional
references who are aware he has had financial problems nonetheless speak highly of
his professionalism and reliability. Also reflective of good judgment is the fact that
Applicant was already acting three years ago to resolve those debts he was able to pay.
Applicant has resolved his tax issues and is unlikely, by virtue of his improved personal
and professional circumstances, and in light of his current financial health, to repeat his
past failures in that regard. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record evidence
as a whole supports a conclusion that the security concerns about Applicant’s finances
have been mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
