 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01499 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hymans, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 15, 2014. 
(Item 5) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
October 11, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 4, 2015. He admitted one (SOR 1.d) 
and denied four financial allegations of delinquent debt. He elected to have the matter 
decided on the written record. (Item 3) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on March 17, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on March 29, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant timely filed a response to the FORM. (Item 9) I was assigned the 
case on September 27, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 5) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the summary. In his response to the FORM, Applicant did not object to consideration 
of the PSI. Any objection to the information is waived. I will consider information in the 
PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file. I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 42-year-old 1992 high school graduate who has some college credits. He 
married in December 2004, separated in November 2013, and has one child. He was a 
mapping technician from October 1992 until December 2010. He was self-employed in 
real estate investment from March 2008 while still working as a mapping technician until 
June 2014. In June 2014, he started employment as a systems technician for the DOD 
contractor that is sponsoring him for a security clearance. This appears to be his first 
application seeking eligibility for access to classified information. (Item 4, e-QIP, dated 
June 2, 2014; Item 5, PSI, dated September 15, 2014)  
 
The SOR alleges and credit reports (Item 6, dated September 14, 2013; Item 7, 
July 24, 2014; and item 8, dated August 27, 2015) confirm the following delinquent 
debts for Applicant; a mortgage with a deficiency balance of $121,602 (SOR 1.a); a 
mortgage with a deficiency balance of $71,871 (SOR 1.b); a credit card debt in 
collection for $2,139 (SOR 1.c); a credit card in collection for $1,733 (SOR 1.d); and a 
medical debt in collection for $526 (SOR 1.e). Applicant contends that the debts alleged 
in SOR 1.c and 1.d are duplicates. He reported the five delinquent debts on his e-QIP. 
The total amount of the delinquent debt in the SOR is $197,871. Two mortgage 
 
3 
 
 
foreclosures constitute $193,473 of the debt, and the remaining $4,398 is for the other 
three debts.  
 
Applicant purchased four houses to use as rental property when he was a self-
employed real estate agent from March 2008 until June 2014. He sold two of the 
houses, but he was unable to rent or sell the other two houses. In September 2012, he 
and his wife decided that financially for the family their best action was to let the houses 
go to foreclosure. In his response to the SOR, Applicant included information from the 
mortgagor showing that the two loans were closed with a zero balance, and no balance 
is due. (Item 3, Response to SOR, Letter, dated October 28, 2015) 
 
In 2012 when he was experiencing financial issues from his investment real 
estate, his wife was providing the majority of the family income. They had two small 
children and could not make the payments for medical and credit card bills. Applicant 
made payments on the credit card debt but the payments were not sufficient or timely to 
meet the requirements of the debts. The debts were placed in collection. SOR 1.c is the 
credit card debt and SOR 1.d is the same debt but for the collection agency. (SOR 1.c 
and 1.d) He provided documents in his response to the FORM that the debt to the 
collection agency is being paid. Applicant provided documents in response to the FORM 
that the medical debt in SOR 1.e has been paid.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Applicant listed his delinquent debts when completing his application for a 
security clearance. He acknowledged the debts to the security investigator. Credit 
reports confirm the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under 
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The 
information raises issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial 
obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the 
Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), apply. Applicant incurred 
delinquent debt because of a business loss from his inability in the market place in 2012 
to sell or rent two houses he purchased as investment properties. These events were 
caused by conditions largely beyond his control. Applicant acted responsibly by having 
the properties foreclosed resulting in no debt owed on the properties. His other debts 
accrued because his wife alone was providing the majority of the family income. He 
acted reasonably by paying off all but one of the debts, and continuing to make 
payments on that debt. 
 
 Applicant did not report receiving financial counseling. However, there are clear 
indications that his financial problems have been resolved and his finances are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
 
 AG ¶20(d) applies. Applicant established a good-faith effort to pay his financial 
obligations. For a good-faith effort, there must be an ability to pay financial obligations, 
the desire to pay them, and evidence of a good-faith effort to pay or resolve the 
obligations. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling 
financial obligations is needed. Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of 
payment of financial obligations. A meaningful track record of payment can be 
established by evidence of actual payments or reduction of obligation through payments 
of debts. A promise to pay financial obligations is not a substitute for a track record of 
meeting obligations in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner. 
Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems 
and has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
 
 Applicant presented sufficient evidence that the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e 
have been resolved. The debts at SOR 1.c and 1.d are duplicates and he is making 
payments on the debt. Applicant has shown that he acted reasonably and responsibly in 
 
6 
 
 
regard to his financial obligations, and his financial problems are under control. His 
reasonable and responsible action towards his finances is a strong indication that he will 
protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant presented sufficient information 
to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided sufficient credible 
documentary information to show that he incurred delinquent debt by conditions beyond 
his control. He established that he took reasonable and responsible action to resolve his 
financial obligations by having his properties foreclosed eliminating his debt on the 
properties. He paid off another debt and is making payments on the remaining debt. 
Applicant demonstrated appropriate management of his finances and a record of action 
to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions 
and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has 
established his suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
