The Government submitted six items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 15-03664
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On December 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated January 29, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on February1
25, 2016. He submitted additional information for the record. I received the case
assignment on October 14, 2016. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant
has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised. Eligibility for a position of trust is
denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations under Guideline F,
with explanations. He stated that his state does not have an income tax, and the
Government concurred. He noted that a few accounts were already paid.  (Item 2) 
Applicant is 30 years old. He is employed with a health insurance company. He
graduated from high school in 2004 and he obtained a technical degree in phlebotomy
in June 2009. He never married and has no children. (Item 3) He has been employed
with his current employer since August 2010. This is his first application for a position of
trust, which he completed on April 24, 2013. (Item 3) 
 The SOR alleges 10  delinquent debts totaling approximately $8,700.  These
debts include medical accounts and collection accounts. (Item 1) Credit reports confirm
the debts. (Items 4 and 5) The SOR also alleges that a 2011 state tax lien was filed in
the amount of $12,177, and a failure to file federal and state tax returns for tax years
2008 through 2012. (Item 1)
Applicant explained in his Answer that he was unemployed from January 2009
through May 2010, save for two, one-month employments. (Item 3) He worked about 20
hours a week. (Item 6) He drew unemployment benefits of approximately $300 a week
during the period of unemployment. A tax lien was issued to Applicant because he
unintentionally failed to abide by a requirement of the state unemployment office, which
resulted in the forfeiture of the previously paid benefits in the amount of $12,177. (Item
6)
In 2013, during an investigative interview, Applicant explained that he did not file
or pay taxes since 2008. He claimed that he did not receive a W-2 from an employer in
2008 and therefore, he was not able to file tax returns or pay taxes for that year. He
elaborated that he had not filed or paid taxes any year since then because he had not
had his tax return from the previous year. (Item 6) During the 2013 interview he stated
that he had not received any notices or correspondence from the IRS regarding the
taxes. However, he noted that he had prepared his tax returns every year and had the
paperwork ready at his residence. He may talk to an accountant. (Item 6) In his
Response to the FORM, Applicant stated that the lien (SOR 1.f), was garnished from
his pay for a number of years and is now paid. He just wrote that he contacted the state
unemployment office and their records show the lien as paid. There is no submitted
document to confirm his assertion. 
 
As to the remaining SOR debts, Applicant stated that SOR 1.a, in the amount of
$3,359 for a repossession was settled. He sent a settlement agreement confirmation
letter that reflected he agreed to settle the account for $503.99. The one-time payment
was  due by March 31, 2016. However, there is no evidence that the payment was
made. (Response to FORM)
3
The SOR debts in 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.j, and 1.k, are admitted but there is no
indication that they have been paid or are in a payment plan. As to the SOR debts in
1.h, and 1.I, totaling $1,355, Applicant stated they have been paid. He did not submit
any evidence to prove his assertion.
The record does not indicate Applicant’s current salary. Applicant did not list any
financial counseling or provide a budget. There is no record of use of a credit
counseling organization. He stated that he was working with a lawyer to file his federal
income tax returns, but he also stated that in his 2013 interview. He intends to fulfill his
financial obligations. He noted in his Response to the FORM that he filed his tax returns
for 2013, 2014, and 2015 because “he can only file the past 3 years.” At the bottom of
his Response To the FORM, Applicant wrote that he is in the process of declaring
bankruptcy. 
Policies   
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3. 1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the
interests of national security.” Regulation C6.1.1.1 Department of Defense contractor
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶¶8.2.1
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national interest.” 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
4
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect sensitive information. 
 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant’s admissions establish his delinquent debts and his credit reports
confirm the debts. He admits to not filing tax returns from 2008 through 2012.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply. Also FC DC AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required by law) applies. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
trustworthiness concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” An unpaid debt is a
continuous course of conduct for the purposes of  adjudications. See, ISCR Case No.
10-11083 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012). Applicant has not provided any
documentation that any debt or lien is paid, although he claimed that he paid two debts
and his wages were garnished for the lien. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
5
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially apply. Applicant listed information
concerning unemployment from January 2009 through May 2010. He did work a part-
time job for a while and he received unemployment benefits of $300 a month.
However, he did not produce documentary evidence when he answered the SOR, or
the Response to the FORM that any debts had been paid. He entered a settlement
agreement for one debt, but he did not present evidence of any payment. He also
noted a garnishment for the lien, but he did not provide documentation to confirm his
position. He has not filed his federal tax returns for the years in question, although he
promised to do so.  This mitigating condition does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant entered into a
settlement agreement for one delinquent debt and was to pay it by March 2016. He did
not provide evidence of payment. He has not provided any documentation for any
delinquent bills or tax lien. He now states that he is in the process of filing bankruptcy.
He did not present evidence that he received financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) (the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem) does not apply.
Consequently, I do not find that there are clear indications that his financial problems
are being resolved and are under control. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position
of trust  must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden
of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a public trust position. 
6
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person
factors. Applicant is 30 years old. He has worked for his current employer since 2010.
He has been unemployed, but he has not presented any evidence that he has acted
responsibly. He noted that he intended to fulfill his financial obligations, but a promise
in the future is not sufficient. He has not shown a track record of acting responsibly
with his delinquent debts. His lack of payments and continued failure to file his federal
income tax returns prevent the application of mitigating conditions. He has not met his
burden of proof in this case. The fact that he now is in the process of filing bankruptcy,
which is a legitimate way of resolving debts, has not been established either for
mitigation. He has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns for a position of public
trust.
 Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of public trust.
Eligibility for  a position of public trust is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
