 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01210 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR with an undated response, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 4, 
2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on March 31, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through D into 
evidence, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open until April 
29, 2016, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant did not submit any 
additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 12, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all the SOR allegations with explanations. The admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer for 12 years. He has a master’s degree. He is divorced and has 
three children, two for whom he provides child support.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is responsible for eight delinquent debts totaling 
$30,705, a 2012 dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and a 2015 Chapter 13 bankruptcy. 
The debts are supported by credit reports from June 2014 and September 2015. The 
bankruptcy allegations are supported by court documents.2  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial distress on a contentious divorce that began in 
2009 and took over six years to resolve. He believes the two years’ worth of alimony 
(2009-2011) he paid his ex-wife was based upon misrepresentations she made about 
her finances. He claims that this also led to an increase in his child support payments. 
His current child support payments are approximately $922 per month. He is up-to-date 
on those payments. He also stated that he expended approximately $60,000 in legal 
fees and related expenses associated with his divorce. He did not provide 
documentation of these expenses.3 
 
  Applicant admitted incurring all the SOR debts, but denied them in his answer 
because they all were included in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. He originally filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in March 2012. That case was dismissed in March 
2014. Applicant claimed that the case was dismissed because the payment plan did not 
include his federal and state tax debt. He was advised by counsel to dismiss this case 
and refile. The refiled case would include the tax debt. The bankruptcy trustee’s motion 
to dismiss stated that non-payment under the plan was the reason for seeking 
dismissal. The court granted the dismissal based upon the trustee’s motion. A 
subsequent Chapter 13 petition was filed in January 2015. Applicant’s Chapter 13 
payment plan was approved in May 2015. All SOR debts are included in this plan. His 
monthly payments are $975 beginning in February 2015 and lasting for 60 months. He 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 22, 24-25; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2-8. 
 
3 Tr. at 27, 29, 48; AE C-D. 
 
 
3 
 
did not present evidence he is making payments under the plan. He testified that his last 
payment was in December 2015. He admitted not making payments for January 
through March 2016. He stated the reason for not making the payments was because 
he is paying his divorce attorney’s fees and his required child support payments. The 
record was held open until April 29, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit proof of 
bankruptcy plan payments. He did not submit any evidence. He received counseling as 
a part of the bankruptcy process.4 
 
 He currently has about $1,000 in his checking account. He has no savings 
account, but he has a pension account containing approximately $50,000.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 31-32, 36-37, 48, 52, 61, 64-65; GE 4-8; AE A-B. 
 
5 Tr. at 54-55. 
 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. He filed two 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions, one in 2012 and a second in 2015. The 2012 case was 
dismissed. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. He admitted being behind three months in his 
bankruptcy plan payments. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s divorce affected his finances. He sought bankruptcy relief, but has not 
offered proof of his payments under the plan and admitted being three months behind 
on his monthly payments. He has not shown responsible action in dealing with his 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling through the bankruptcy process. He 
sought to handle his debts through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, but failed to offer 
evidence that he is making payments under the plan. The evidence is insufficient to 
conclude that his financial problems are resolved or under control. Even if he was 
current on his bankruptcy plan payments, such action, while legally permissible to rid 
one of debts, does not constitute a good-faith effort to pay one’s debts. It certainly does 
not alleviate the security concerns arising from Applicant’s poor judgment that led to his 
repeated financial problems. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies, but ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation was 
affected by his divorce and related matters. However, I also considered while he 
established a bankruptcy payment plan under Chapter 13, he failed to provide evidence 
that he was making payments under the plan and admitted he was three months behind 
on his payments. His financial track record reflects an unstable financial history, which 
causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
