DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------   )       ISCR Case No. 06-20204
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 27 October 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline B.  Applicant answered the SOR 14 November 2007, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 10 January 2008, and I convened a hearing 13
February 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 22 February 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.h. Accordingly, I incorporate his
admissions as findings of fact. He denied SOR allegations 1.b. through 1.g. He is a 53-
year-old linguist employed by defense contractors since March 2003. He seeks to retain
the security clearance he obtained in March 2003.
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in March 1954. He immigrated to the U.S. in
February 1977, became a legal permanent resident (LPR), and was naturalized as a
U.S. citizen in January 1984. He obtained his most recent U.S. passport in December
2004. Applicant’s wife, who he married in October 1988, is an LPR of the U.S. She is
eligible for her U.S. citizenship, but she failed the language portion of the citizenship test
and is applying to retake it. Applicant and his wife have five children, all native-born U.S.
citizens. They all reside in the U.S. Applicant owns his home in the U.S. and all his
financial interests are here.
Applicant’s siblings include a brother, sister, and half brother. His brother is a
resident citizen of Afghanistan, employed as a farmer. His sister is a dual citizen of
Afghanistan and Germany, residing with her husband in Germany. His half-brother is a
citizen of Afghanistan, permanently residing in Australia. 
Applicant’s wife has a number of siblings and step-siblings who are resident
citizens of Afghanistan. Except for one brother who recently retired as a construction
supervisor for the Interior Ministry, none of these siblings has any connection to the
Afghan government. In addition, Applicant’s contacts with his siblings-in-law are limited,
as are his contacts with his own siblings. Applicant also has a casual friendship with a
Pakistani doctor who he met about 10 years ago. They have visited 4-5 times in those
10 years, but not since September 2005.
Between March 2003 and July 2005, Applicant was deployed to Afghanistan as a
contract linguist in support of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF). During most of that
time, he worked as a political advisor, interpreter, and translator for a Provincial
Reconstruction Team (PRT), and was designated the lead linguist in the PRT. He also
worked in the field in direct support of Army operations in dangerous situations. Put
bluntly, he is one of the entry points for the classified intelligence that comes to U.S.
forces from Iraqi insurgents and informants. He has been uniformly praised by his
employer, his senior civilian supervisors, and his Army supervisors (senior officers and
junior officers alike) for his patriotism, his personal bravery in “red zones,” the quality of
his translations and interpretations in Pashto, Farsi, and several other languages, and
the cultural nuances that he is able to bring to interrogations. His cultural knowledge
and skill at putting informants at ease increases the likelihood that he will obtain
accurate information (G.E. 2).
Applicant’s current job requires him to recruit other linguists for deployment to
Afghanistan. His co-worker considers him honest and trustworthy, as do his friend and
neighbor.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
3
Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic and emerging democracy. With the support of
the U.S. and other nations, the new government endeavors to build a new system of
government and to rebuild the country’s infrastructure. The Army and police force are
well trained. The government continues to face significant challenges from insurgents
and terrorist organizations supported by the ousted Taliban as well as Al Qa’ida, but
actively seeks to eliminate both with the assistance of the U.S. and NATO. The new
government is also working to reverse a long legacy of serious human rights abuses,
but serious problems remain. Afghanistan is now an active member of the international
community and has signed a “Good Neighbor” declaration with six nations bordering it
and promotes regional cooperation. The U.S. supports the emergence of a broad-based
government in Afghanistan. Afghanistan continues to seek U.S. support as it moves
forward towards democracy and stability. It is not known to be an active collector of
intelligence information.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline B. 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.3
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).4
4
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information3
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk or foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.4
In this case, the government failed to establish a case for disqualification under
Guideline B. Considering first the country involved, Afghanistan and the U.S. enjoy good
foreign relations. It has not been demonstrated that the Afghan government is actively
engaged in the collection of U.S. intelligence such that would make Applicant or his
family likely targets for coercion, duress, or influence. The government’s evidence
explains the links to terrorism that are on-going in Afghanistan and the way that those
terrorist organizations operate, the increase in terrorism, and the increase in
membership in terrorist groups. Several of the groups that are frequently in the news,
for example the Taliban and Al Qa’ida, operate in Afghanistan and practice terrorist acts
against Afghanis and against U.S. forces as well as indiscriminate violence in order to
draw attention to themselves and increase their membership and their power. There is
no indication they use terrorism to gain access to U.S. information.
Considering Applicant’s circumstances, the government produced no evidence
that there was a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion because of Applicant’s limited family contacts in Afghanistan.
None of Applicant’s family members have any direct connection to the Afghan
government, and there is nothing in the past connections of his brother-in-law (now
retired) or other siblings-in-law to raise a concern over protecting classified information.
Further, Applicant has been in the U.S. more than 30 years. His wife and children are
here. All his financial interests are here. His contacts with family members in
Afghanistan and his friend in Pakistan range from nearly non-existent to casual, and
there is nothing in the circumstances of their being in Afghanistan or Pakistan, or in
Applicant’s contacts with them, to heighten the risk that he could be impelled or
A factor the Appeal Board has recently acknowledged as a legitimate factor for consideration in Guideline5
B cases. See, ISCR Case No. 07-00034 (5 February 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-02511 (20 March2007).
5
compelled to provide protected information to Lebanon. Further, Applicant has served
with U.S. forces in Afghanistan with distinction, essentially producing classified
intelligence for those forces and protecting U.S. interests.  Under these circumstances, I5
conclude that it is unlikely Applicant can be pressured based on his family members in
Afghanistan or his friend in Pakistan. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
Formal Findings
   Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f: For Applicant
Subparagraph g: For Applicant
Subparagraph h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
