1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 04-11375
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Attorney At Law
December 8, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) dated July 13,
2006.  On July 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B and C
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on August 12, 2008, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on September 16, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on September 23,
2008, scheduling the hearing for November 5, 2008.  On September 29, 2008, the
hearing dated was amended from November 5, 2008, to November 12, 2008.  At the
hearing the Government presented nine exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
2
through 9.  The Applicant presented four exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A
through D, and testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until November
19, 2008, to allow the Applicant to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant
submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on November 24, 2008.  Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Iran.  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 11).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 61 years of age and has a Doctorate
Degree in Electrical Engineering.  He is employed as a Senior Principal Multi-
Disciplinary Engineer for a defense contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has acted in such a
way as to show a preference for another country over the United States. 
The Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States.  He was born in
Tehran, Iran in 1946, to Iranian parents.  He came to the United States in 1965, at the
age of nineteen, on a student visa to pursue his studies with the intentions of returning
to Iran.  While attending college, he met his wife, a native American citizen.  In 1975,
after finishing his Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees, he returned with his wife to Iran to
live. 
While living in Iran, the Applicant was employed for an Iranian company where
he held a Top Secret Iranian Clearance.  (Tr. p 76).  He entered the Iranian Army where
he served for four years and obtained the rank of First Lieutenant.  On land that the
Applicant inherited from his father, he built a condominium to live in.  He and his wife
lived in Iran until 1979, when the revolution occurred, and then moved back to the
United States.  
The Applicant became a naturalized United States citizen in 1984, and obtained
his doctorate degree.  On February 11, 2004, in a sworn statement to the DoD, he
stated that he was not willing to relinquish his Iranian passport because he did not know
3
if he would need to travel to Iran because of his mother or his property.  Furthermore, it
would require that he petition the Iranian government and he does not want to bring
attention to himself in that way.  (Government Exhibit 5 and Tr. pp. 72-73 ).  Presently,
he still does not wish to renounce his Iranian citizenship.  (Tr. p. 72). 
At the hearing, Applicant still possessed an Iranian passport that was issued to
him on November 12, 1998, and expired in 2003.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A and Tr. p. 42).
He now indicates that he is willing to surrender it if necessary.  Applicant submitted a
copy of a Foreign Passport Disposition Certificate indicating that on November 13,
2008, he surrendered his foreign passport to his company security department.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A).  The Applicant has two children who are native
born American citizens.  However, his wife and children are dual citizens of Iran and
they all possess Iranian passports.      
Since becoming a United States citizen, the Applicant has traveled to Iran on
three occasions using his Iranian passport.  The first time was in 1996, in honor of his
father’s death.  The second time was in 1999, or so to take his wife and children back to
Iran visit his mother and see the countryside.  In 2001, his daughter graduated from
college and he took her back to visit his mother and spend time in Iran.  On each trip the
Applicant stayed with his mother.  (Tr. p. 68).  
The Applicant hopes to someday be able to go back to Iran, to visit, but not under
the present regime.  (Tr. p. 47).  In the event of his mother’s death, he will not go back.
(Tr. p. 49).  He states that he has no intentions of returning to Iran while he maintains a
security clearance.  The Applicant has worked for his current employer since 2002, and
holds a Top Secret security clearance.
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant has a close and continuing relationship with his family in Iran.  His
95 year old mother, a retired medical doctor, and his sister, a retired University
professor, are citizens and residents of Iran.  His brother, who is two years older than
the Applicant and also married to an American citizen, is a resident of Iran.  They
moved back to Iran take care of the Applicant’s mother.  The Applicant’s contact with his
mother has decreased over the years, however he presently telephones her, once every
two months or so to check on her.  He e-mails his brother about once a week or once
every two weeks.  (Tr. p. 41).  His father, who was a retired government civil engineer
passed away in 1991.  
His mother receives a pension from the Iranian government for her husband’s
service to the country.  His sister also receives a pension from the Iranian government.
Her husband is a retired Colonel in the Iranian Air Force.  When his mother dies, he
stands to inherit some assets in Iran.        
4
The Applicant owns a condominium in Iran that he and his wife had built on land
that he inherited from his father.  The condominium is worth approximately $300,000.00.
His mother currently resides either in the condominium or adjacent to it.  For some time,
the Applicant has rented out the condominium.  The rents received went directly to his
brother for management fees and maintenance costs.  Upon the advice of his attorney,
he recently transferred ownership of his property to his two brothers.  He states that he
is not expecting financial reimbursement for it. (Tr. pp. 53-54).  He currently has no
financial assets in his name in Iran.     
The Applicant has significant financial holdings in the United States.  He owns a
house worth approximately $750,000.00 and has equity of approximately $400,000.00.
His credit reports show that he pays his bills on time and has good credit.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit B).       
Letters of character reference from professional colleagues, coworkers,
neighbors, friends and his pastor attest to the Applicant’s honesty, integrity, intelligence
and strong work ethic.  He is known as a devoted family man, who is a loving and
compassionate father and deeply devoted to the United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C).
Applicant received two achievement awards for outstanding job performance.
(Applicant’s Exhibit D).
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Iran.  The
fact that Iran has no diplomatic relations with the United States, Iran’s efforts to acquire
nuclear weapons and other weapon of mass destruction, its support for and involvement
in international terrorism, it’s support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process, and it’s dismal human rights records.  I have considered the fact that Iranian
Government officials at all levels commit serious abuses of their power and authority.
It’s Totalitarian Government, the fact that Iran supports terrorists activities, and it is
rampant with crime and instability.  The overall deteriorating security situation in Iran,
the human rights abuses, and the government corruption elevates the cause for
concern in the case.  The United States may face no greater challenge from a single
country than from Iran.    
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
5
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Preference
9.  The Concern.  When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
10.  (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a United States citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
6
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
I.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guidelines C (foreign preference)
and B (foreign influence) that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between
Applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified
information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
7
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign connection may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate questions as to whether the
Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the United States paramount to
that of another country. The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
 
Under Foreign Preference, Disqualifying Conditions 10 (a) exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a United States citizen or
through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  None of the mitigating conditions
are applicable. 
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies in this
case.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable. 
The Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States and specifically
acknowledges that.  Although his wife and children are native born Americans, they are
all dual citizens and have Iranian passports to enter and exit Iran as they wish.  The
Applicant remains close to his mother, sister and brother who are citizens and residents
of Iran.  He did not want to sell his property in Iran because he knew it would
emotionally hurt his mother, so he transferred ownership of it to his brothers.  He loves
and respects his mother and siblings in Iran.  He telephones and e-mails his family in
Iran regularly.  He has a strong bond of affection with his family and deep and abiding
ties in Iran.  He stands to inherit assets in Iran upon the death of his mother.
Furthermore, after becoming a United States citizen, he exercised his privilege of
foreign citizenship, by traveling to Iran using his Iranian passport on three separate
occasions.  He does not want to relinquish his Iranian citizenship.  He has not cut all ties
from Iran.    
8
It is noted that the current political situation in Iran elevates the cause for concern
in this case.  Although there is no direct evidence that his family members in Iran are
associated in any way with the Iranian government, there is evidence of a close bond
and strong evidence of affection with his family in Iran.  This bond and affection with his
family could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, the possibility of foreign
influence exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the compromise
of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is vulnerable to foreign influence.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and B
(Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guidelines C and
B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.c.: Against the Applicant 
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
Subparas. 2.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 2.b.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 2.c.: Against the Applicant 
Subparas. 2.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 2.e.: Against the Applicant
9
 DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
