                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ADP Case No. 06-15001 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William S. Aramony, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated trustworthiness concerns regarding Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). Applicant’s court-martial and dismissal from 
military service were more than 13 years ago. Her subsequent conduct establishes that 
she is rehabilitated. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 22, 2003, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 5). On April 22, 2007, Applicant submitted another SF 86 (GE 
5). On July 2, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her (GE 11), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
1992, as amended, modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns 
under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III position, which permits access to sensitive 
information, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
such access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On July 20, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to 
have her case decided by a hearing before an administrative judge (GE 12). On 
October 16, 2008, the case was assigned to me. On October 20, 2008, notice was 
issued and on October 27, 2008, amended notice was issued for the hearing, which 
was held on November 25, 2008. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered eight 
exhibits (GEs 1-8) (Transcript (Tr.) 25), and Applicant offered 13 exhibits (Tr. 27-29, 
107; AE A-M). There were no objections, and I admitted GEs 1-8 (Tr. 26-27), and AEs 
A-M (Tr. 28-29, 107). Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and two 
Hearing Notices (GEs 9-12). I received the transcript on December 4, 2008.  
 
Procedural Issues2 
 
The SOR cited facts that would have brought Applicant’s case under the 
prohibitions of the Smith Amendment (10 U.S.C. § 986), because she was convicted 
and sentenced to punishments including dismissal from the Air Force for offenses under 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). However, this section of the United States 
Code, which applied only to clearances granted by DoD, was repealed on January 28, 
2008, when the President signed the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2008 into law. It was replaced by adding Sec. 3002 to 50 U.S.C. § 435b (the Bond 
Amendment), which applies throughout the Federal Government. Sec. 3002(c) of this 
new provision continues the requirement for disqualification, absent a meritorious 
waiver, for persons who were sentenced to and served imprisonment for more than a 
year. However, this disqualification only applies to prevent clearances that would 
provide access to special access programs (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), or any other 
information commonly referred to as “special compartmented information” (SCI). 
 
This statutory modification ends the former Smith Amendment requirement for a 
meritorious Secretarial waiver to grant or continue a regular, or “collateral,” security 
clearance to a person who has received a dismissal from the Air Force. On June 20, 
2008, prior to the issuance of the SOR and the hearing in this case, the Under 
 
1On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
2Administrative Judge White cogently explained the interplay between the Smith Act, the Bond 
Amendment and revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) J in ISCR Case No. 07-11963 (A.J. Aug. 20, 2008). 
I have borrowed freely and extensively without further citation from his explanation in this section.   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) issued a memorandum providing interim guidance 
for implementation of the Bond Amendment. This memorandum set forth guidance for 
adjudicators to assess the potential application of the Bond Amendment to security 
clearance determinations and requirements for “Exception” identification of persons 
subject to its limitations in the Joint Adjudication Management System (JAMS) if a 
collateral clearance is granted. The granting of access to SAP, RD or SCI to such 
individuals requires a meritorious waiver under the terms of that memorandum. Such 
access is not at issue in this case, and accordingly the Bond Amendment was not 
addressed in either the SOR or at the hearing. 
 
The repeal of the Smith Amendment also nullified the legal authority by which the 
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence modified the revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) that were approved by the President on December 29, 2005. When the 
Under Secretary promulgated the AG for use within DoD, on August 30, 2006, he added 
provisions reflecting the Smith Amendment. AG H (Drug Involvement), AG I 
(Psychological Conditions), and AG J (Criminal Conduct) were each modified, but only 
the latter guideline is involved in this case. It was modified by adding AG ¶¶ 31(f), 32(e), 
and footnotes 1 and 2. Because the President, in Executive Order 12968, intended to 
establish “a uniform Federal personnel security program” (Intro.), and required a 
“common set of adjudicative guidelines for determining eligibility for access to classified 
information” (Sec. 3.1(f).), the authority for these DoD modifications to the guidelines 
ended with the repeal of the Smith Amendment. The new statutory requirements are in 
effect and must be followed pending formal revision of the AG, but only the prohibition 
against granting clearances to unlawful drug users and addicts under AG H applies to 
“collateral” security clearances. Accordingly, the Smith Amendment-related provisions 
added to AG J have been repealed, and do not apply to the remaining proceedings in 
this case.     
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant was born in 1948 in the Philippines (GE 5). She was married in 1984 
and divorced in 1986 (GE 5). She married again in 1989 and divorced in 1992 (GE 5). 
Applicant attended medical school from 1969 to 1972 in the Philippines, graduating 
magna cum laude (Tr. 63; GE 5; AE A). She completed her residency in New York State 
(AE A). She received a medical license in three states (Tr. 63). Applicant joined the 
military as a general surgeon in July 1981 (Tr. 64; GE 5).  
 
 
3Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.   
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Criminal Conduct4 
 
 In June 1995, Applicant was convicted contrary to her pleas by a general court-
martial with members of dereliction of duty, signing a false official document and larceny 
of government funds, in violation of Articles 92, 107, and 121, UCMJ; 10 U.S.C. §§ 892, 
907 and 921. She was sentenced to total forfeitures, confinement for six months and 
dismissal from the Air Force. She was released early from confinement at Fort 
Leavenworth because of good behavior (Tr. 74).  
  
 Prior to her court-martial, Applicant completed 14 years of outstanding service as 
a board certified surgeon and rose to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. The day she was 
scheduled to be promoted to Colonel she learned she would not be promoted because 
she was under investigation for larceny of housing allowances (Tr. 74). At the time of 
her offenses and court-martial, she was assigned to an overseas command in the Far 
East. Applicant’s mother died on December 19, 1991, and Applicant was divorced on 
January 18, 1992 (Tr. 68, 91). She learned her divorce was final in October 1992, and 
the members modified the findings to reflect when she learned of her change of status 
(Tr. 69; GE 1 at 442). Her entitlement to receive dependent allowances terminated 
when she was divorced. She notified the personnel office of her divorce; however, she 
failed to notify the finance office of her divorce (Tr. 70, 97, 102). Her notification to 
personnel was apparently not documented in her personnel records at the time she 
made this disclosure. Applicant continued to receive more allowances than she was 
entitled to receive.  
 
 In December 1993, Applicant signed a document certifying her entitlement to 
dependent allowances (Tr. 91). She listed her deceased mother as her dependent (Tr. 
91). She also listed her deceased mother as a dependent on her 1992 and 1993 income 
tax returns (Tr. 92). Her tax returns indicate her mother lived with her for 12 months of 
the 1992 and 1993 tax years (Tr. 93-94). When she was about to change duty stations, 
a personnel specialist, who was preparing her orders, asked about the status of her 
husband. At first, she said she was separated from her husband and he need not be 
listed on her orders. The personnel specialist replied that until there was a divorce, he 
could be listed on her orders. Applicant then informed the personnel specialist that she 
was divorced.  However she falsely reiterated that her mother was her dependent. After 
court-martial charges were preferred, Applicant reimbursed the government about 
$23,000 for the overpayment of her housing allowance (Tr. 73). She subsequently 
amended her tax returns to correct the false information submitted in her 1992 and 1993 
tax returns (Tr. 115-116). 
 
 At Applicant’s court-martial she claimed she was unaware that she was receiving 
the extra pay by virtue of the false dependent information that she provided to finance 
 
4 Applicant admitted the appellate court decision, dated November 27, 1996, which affirmed her 
findings and sentence, accurately described her background, her criminal conduct and the processing of 
her court-martial conviction and sentence (Tr. 68, 100; GE 3). Unless stated otherwise, this appellate 
court decision is the source for the information in this section.   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(Tr. 95-96). She said she did not remember signing the false certification in December 
1993 concerning her mother’s continuing status as a dependent (Tr. 98).    
 
Post-trial Actions 
 
 After her court-martial, Applicant lost her license to practice medicine (Tr. 72-74). 
She practiced medicine in the Philippines from 1996 to 2000 (Tr. 75). She provided 
medical services in a poor village and was usually paid with food such as rice or 
chickens (Tr. 77-79). She often provided surgery in the Philippines without charging for 
her services (AE A). In 2000, her debts were discharged using bankruptcy; however, 
her credit is good now (Tr. 76, 80).  Her September 17, 2008, credit report showed four 
open accounts and no delinquent information (AE H). From 2000 to 2002, she typed 
some transcripts and babysat children (Tr. 79). In 2002, she began her work for 
government contractors (Tr. 79). She told Mr. C, her employer, about the court-martial 
the first day she met him (Tr. 83). Since 2004, Applicant has worked with sensitive 
patient and provider information (Tr. 84-85). She carefully safeguards the privacy 
information entrusted to her (Tr. 85-90). Applicant was remorseful about her misconduct 
(Tr. 76). None of the offenses have recurred (Tr. 90).  After her conviction she is extra 
careful about signing things and avoiding doing anything that might be construed as 
false (Tr. 100-101). 
       
Recommendations and Achievements 
  
 The President and CEO of the government contractor employing Applicant (Mr. 
C) has known Applicant about six years (Tr. 15). Mr. C retired from the Navy after 24 
years service with the rank of Commander (Tr. 16-17). Applicant disclosed her court-
martial before she was hired (Tr. 18, 22-23). Applicant began working for the contractor 
in August 2002 (Tr. 17). In 2003, the contractor initially submitted Applicant’s clearance 
request, and she was awarded an interim ADP clearance (Tr. 17). She currently has 
access to sensitive information (Tr. 23). Applicant works in the area of medical 
credentialing and quality assurance (Tr. 20). She works side-by-side with active duty 
medical personnel (Tr. 20-21). Mr. C described Applicant as a valued employee with 
excellent to outstanding work performance (Tr. 19-20). Applicant is very trustworthy (Tr. 
21).  
 
 Colonel (Ret.) (COL) S has known Applicant for 27 years (Tr. 31).  COL S and 
Applicant worked together for two years before Applicant’s court-martial, and they 
stayed in touch over the years thereafter (Tr. 32). When she was on active duty, 
Applicant distinguished herself for her positive relationships with patients and staff at the 
hospital (Tr. 33). COL S drove from New Mexico to Arlington, Virginia to speak on 
Applicant’s behalf (Tr. 34). Applicant has demonstrated through hard work and initiative 
that she has been rehabilitated (Tr. 35-38, 42-43). Applicant is very honest and 
trustworthy (Tr. 34-35, 37-37).     
 
 Commander (Ret.) (CMDR) L served on active duty for 25 years and retired as a 
Commander in 1998 (Tr. 46). CMDR L was previously a director for the contractor who 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
hired Applicant (Tr. 46, 50). He came to Applicant’s hearing from Colorado (Tr. 45). 
Applicant was responsible for developing and improving verification and documentation 
of health care providers’ credentials (Tr. 47-48). She worked with the highest levels of 
the Services’ medical departments including their Surgeon Generals (Tr. 56). Applicant 
did an excellent job and her contributions to the Department of Defense are 
“tremendous” (Tr. 54, 57). CMDR L would trust Applicant with his life (Tr. 56). Despite 
her court-martial, CMDR L recommended her for a position with access to sensitive 
government information and believes she is highly trustworthy (Tr. 51-55, 58-59). 
 
An August 2006 letter of appreciation from a Major General in the Office of the 
Surgeon General described a critically important topic Applicant presented at a 
symposium as an outstanding success (AE B). A December 2006 letter of appreciation 
from a Colonel at the Department of Defense level warmly thanked Applicant and other 
contractor employees for her guidance, tireless efforts and superb work product (AE C).  
She received several certificates and a memorandum of appreciation for her work on 
behalf of the contractor (AE D, E, F). The contractor’s 2007 annual evaluation for her 
performance rated her outstanding in ten categories, exceeds expectations in seven 
categories and meets expectations in one category (AE G). The contractor’s comments 
on the 2007 annual rating emphasized her strong leadership, solid reliability and 
outstanding judgment (AE G).   
 
Other character witnesses who have known Applicant for many years and some 
for decades lauded her contributions to her employer, hard work, diligence, dedication, 
friendliness, positive attitude, honesty and trustworthiness (AE A, J, K, L). Senior 
personnel, such as a medical doctor (AE A), a retired Colonel (AE J) and a retired Navy 
Captain (AE L) provided written character references. 
 
Applicant has contributed her services to charity and family for many years. She 
has always supported her sister, who is mentally handicapped (Tr. 65). Every two years 
Applicant tried to return to the Philippines to provide pro bono surgical services at a 
clinic (Tr. 66). She tutors illiterate people twice a week in the United States (Tr. 67; AE 
I). She also volunteers in other worthy endeavors such as collecting food for the poor 
(Tr. 67).     
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or 
his designee to grant Applicants eligibility for access to classified or sensitive 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 
20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance or a public trust position is predicated upon the 
Applicant meeting the criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information and sensitive information. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified or sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance or 
public trust determination. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified or sensitive information. The government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531. “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. 
See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance 
[or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant trustworthiness concern is under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct).  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to criminal conduct, 
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
AGs ¶¶ 31(a), 31(b) and 31(c) apply. Applicant was convicted of two felony-level 
offenses and one misdemeanor at her general court-martial in 1995. Specifically, the 
court-martial found her guilty of dereliction of duty, signing a false official document and 
larceny of government funds. She admitted that she committed the three criminal 
offenses. She was sentenced to total forfeitures, confinement for six months and 
dismissal from the Air Force.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns: 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply to mitigate the criminal conduct. Applicant's last 
offense resulting in a conviction occurred prior to her June 1995 court-martial, more 
than 13 years ago. She served her sentence to confinement and paid full restitution to 
the government. She frequently volunteers in her community. She worked for three 
years in the Philippines after her trial providing surgical services to villagers for almost 
no remuneration, which provided a lengthy period to contemplate her poor judgment 
and theft of government funds. She has changed her lifestyle and her environment. She 
is no longer a practicing physician or Air Force officer. Her criminal offenses are unlikely 
to recur because they had a devastating impact on her lifestyle and medical career. Her 
demonstrated intent not to commit future crimes is encompassed in these two mitigating 
conditions. She has demonstrated remorse and been reformed. She has worked with 
information technology for six years and has a good employment record. There is a 
strong evidentiary record in this case showing her full rehabilitation for the particular 
offenses resulting in her charges and convictions. At her hearing she demonstrated her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment through her candor at her hearing 
about the offenses. She was very remorseful and sincere in her acceptance of 
responsibility and her declaration of culpability.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
Applicant’s conduct is explicitly and most specifically covered under the criminal 
conduct guideline. Aside from her criminal conduct and behavior directly related to the 
criminal offenses, there is no other adverse information. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 
16(d) do not apply.  
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
However, there is an issue in any personal conduct case when criminal conduct 
involving false documents and larceny are established. Such conduct shows 
“questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations.” Such misconduct raises questions about Applicant’s “reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified [or sensitive] information.” See AG ¶ 15. 
Applicant engaged in personal conduct “that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing.” Clearly her criminal 
conduct and dismissal from the Air Force are activities that adversely affect her 
personal, professional and community standing.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d) and 17(e) apply. Applicant disclosed her court-martial 
conviction to her employer before she was hired and listed it on her security clearance 
applications. At her hearing, she fully and frankly described her criminal conduct. She 
has taken the positive step of disclosure to her employer and security officials, ending 
any vulnerability to exploitation or duress. The offenses occurred more than 13 years 
ago, and have not recurred. She was held accountable, paid her restitution and served 
her confinement. She has served the poor and illiterate in the Philippines and United 
States. She has performed very well for her employer for six years and has 
demonstrated her reliability and trustworthiness. For all the reasons indicated in the 
previous section, and this section, I conclude she has been rehabilitated and 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance or public trust position by considering the 
totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance or public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
Whole Person Concept. Applicant committed serious offenses in 1992 and 1993. She 
failed to inform the finance office about her divorce and her mother’s death. She falsely 
certified she had a dependent to the finance section. She received about $23,000 in 
housing allowance to which she was not entitled. She falsified her federal tax returns in 
1992 and 1993 when she claimed her deceased mother as a dependent and illegally 
failed to pay some of her income taxes. Applicant’s deliberate misconduct is serious and 
she received a significant punishment. The court-martial sentence included a dismissal, 
a punishment reserved for situations involving serious misconduct by an officer. She 
lost her licenses to practice medicine in the United States. 
 
Applicant’s mitigating information is more compelling. A court-martial held 
Applicant accountable for her misconduct in 1995. She paid restitution, served her 
confinement, amended her tax returns and paid her income taxes. In the 13 years that 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
followed her court-martial, she has not committed any new offenses. At her hearing, she 
was candid about her misconduct and very remorseful. She provided full and complete 
information on her security clearance applications and at her hearing. I do not have any 
questions or concerns about her current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant also receives substantial credit for her strong support from credible 
witnesses concerning her efforts to reform and rehabilitate herself after 1995. Her work 
for a defense contractor is excellent to outstanding, and aside from the SOR allegations 
no other disciplinary or trustworthiness-related problems surfaced. Her record of good 
employment weighs in her favor. There is very compelling evidence of her responsibility, 
rehabilitation and mitigation. I am convinced that she is loyal to her family, her company 
and her country.   
 
  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has mitigated 
trustworthiness concerns pertaining to criminal conduct and personal conduct. I take 
this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 
(1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and supporting evidence, 
my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has mitigated or 
overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is eligible to 
occupy an ADP I/II/III position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an 
ADP I/II/III position. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III position is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
