                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-26395 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Daniel Crowley, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Raymond D. Kline, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was cited for possession of marijuana in 2000 and 2006. He did not list 
the 2000 citation on his security clearance questionnaire because it had been dismissed 
and expunged and he did not believe he had to list it. Applicant has rebutted or 
mitigated the government’s security concerns under drug involvement, personal 
conduct, and criminal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 2, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under drug involvment, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. 
 
 On August 8, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
September 23, 2008, I was assigned the case. On September 29, 2009, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on October 21, 2008. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant and his 
father testified on Applicant’s behalf and submitted Exhibits A through C, which were 
admitted into evidence. On October 30, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
2. a, and 3.c. He admitted the remaining factual allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old analyst who has worked for a defense contractor since 
April 2008, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Friends and co-workers state 
Applicant is a person of unquestioned dedication and loyalty. He is hard working, 
conscientious, diligent, industrious, trustworthy, intelligent, dedicated, competent, and a 
considerate young man. He accepts responsibility, uses excellent judgment in dealing 
with sensitive personnel information, and performs his work with speed, accuracy, and 
efficiency. (Ex. B) 
 
 Applicant was a good high school student graduating in the top 10% of his class. 
Applicant received academic scholarships for college. Applicant maintains good credit 
and has a credit score of 771. (Tr. 20, Ex. C) 
 
 From May 2000, when Applicant was 18 years old, through October 2000 and 
again in September 2006, he used marijuana. He did not use marijuana between 2001 
and 2005. (Tr. 50) In September 2000, at the start of the college fall semester, Applicant 
was charged with possession of marijuana by the university police. (Ex. B, Ex. 2) He 
and his roommate had been smoking marijuana in their college dorm room. The 
university police discovered a small amount of marijuana in the room. (Tr. 33) Applicant 
was found guilty, sentenced to one year probation, 150 hours of community service, 
paid $225, and his driver’s license was restricted for six months. He was subject to 
random drug test for a year and was required to attend ten weeks of substance abuse 
meetings. (Tr. 50-51, 73) He was required to attend four AA meeting, which he found to 
be eye-opening. (Tr. 75)  
 
In November 2001, following the completion of probation, the case was 
dismissed. (Tr. 33, Ex. B) He was dismissed from the university and the next semester 
attended community college.  
 
 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
 In June 2001, Applicant—then age 19—was charged with, and later found guilty 
of, underage possession of alcohol. (Ex. 3) Applicant was at a state park fishing with his 
boss from a landscaping company. The park ranger saw a beer near Applicant. (Tr. 31) 
His boss told the park ranger the beer was his. Applicant was given and passed a 
breathalyzer test, but the ranger never-the-less ticketed Applicant. (Tr. 59) Applicant 
pleaded no contest, paid a $30 fine, and performed 25 hours of community service at a 
homeless shelter. Applicant juggled his community service commitment with his school 
commitment and a part-time job. (Tr. 61)  
 
 In January 2006, Applicant obtained a bachelors of science degree. (Tr. 37) In 
September 2006, Applicant was again cited for possession of marijuana. (Ex. 4) 
Applicant was riding in a friend’s car when his friend ran a stop sign. A search of the car 
discovered “a piece of marijuana” in a cigarette pack under Applicant’s seat. (Tr. 69) 
Applicant acknowledge it was his and accepted responsibility. (Tr. 32) The day after 
receiving the citation, Applicant disclosed the incident to his company’s security officer. 
(Tr. 107) Applicant’s driver’s license was restricted for six months and the disposition of 
his case was deferred to December 2007, at which time it was dismissed. For a six-
month period Applicant was subject to random urinalysis screenings.  
 
 Applicant acknowledges his decision to used marijuana after completing his 
security clearance applicant was a “stupid decision.” (Tr. 49) Applicant has regretted his 
decision “every day since.” (Tr. 49)  
 
 In February 2006, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Applicant listed the June 2001 underage possession 
of alcohol, but failed to list his September 2000 conviction for marijuana possession. 
  
Applicant’s father retired from the Air Force as a lieutenant colonel (05) after 22 
years. His father works for a defense contractor and holds a clearance. Applicant and 
his father discussed listing the dismissed drug charges on Applicant’s e-QIP. (Tr. 28, 
34) After talking with his father, Applicant did not list the arrest because it had been 
expunged from his record. (Tr. 47) Applicant’s father does not believe his son’s was 
deliberately lying in his response. In October 2006, when interviewed, Applicant 
disclosed the September 2006 citation to the interviewer. The interviewer was unaware 
of the incident. (Tr. 35, 85)  
 
In response to Question 24 of the e-QIP, Applicant listed use of marijuana 10 
times during 2000. Between his first use to his 2006 arrest, Applicant had use 
marijuana approximately 10 times. He did not use marijuana between 2001 and 2005. 
Applicant stated that using marijuana is detrimental to growth and leads down the wrong 
path. (Tr. 39) In the past, he made stupid decisions by using it when it was offered. He 
no longer associates with people who use marijuana. (Tr. 42, 71) Applicant is willing to 
submit to random urine screens. (Tr. 29, 39)  
 
 
 
 
4
Applicant’s father believes, regardless of the outcome of this proceeding, that the 
proceeding has had a “profound effect” on his son. (Tr. 100) His son has learned the 
gravity of the situation, and the proceeding will continue to have an influence and effect 
on his son.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
 
 
 
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
From May 2000 to October 2000, when Applicant was 18 years old, and again in 
September 2006, he used marijuana. Between his first use to his 2006 arrest, Applicant 
had use marijuana approximately 10 times. There was no use between 2001 and 2005. 
His use, though infrequent, led to two citations for marijuana possession; once in 2000 
 
 
 
6
and again in 2006. His most recent use occurred after he had completed his e-QIP 
seeking a security clearance.  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) drug use and AG ¶ 25(c) purchase, apply. AG ¶ 25(g) illegal drug use 
after have being granted a security clearance does not apply because, even though he 
had started the process to obtain a security clearance, he had not been granted a 
clearance.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
 Applicant last used marijuana two years ago. Applicant characterized his 2006 
use as a “stupid decision,” which he has regretted “every day since.” Applicant does not 
intend to use illegal drugs in the future. Although he has not signed an affidavit stating 
he would submit to drug testing and any drug use would result in the loss of his 
clearance, but did state he would submit to random urine tests.  
 
Applicant used marijuana ten times over a six year period. His use was 
infrequent. It has been more than two years since his last marijuana use. There are no 
“bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be 
based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by 
the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the 
 
 
 
7
                                                          
Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an 
applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing 
was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without 
any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
Because of his abstention from drug use for two years, his recognition of the 
adverse impact drug abuse on his life, and the profound effect this procedure has had 
on him, there is reasonable certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. 
Applicant did not attempt to hide his 2006 citation for illegal usage. The following day, 
he reported the incident to his company’s security office. Applicant did not used 
marijuana from 2001 to 2005 and used it once in 2006. His marijuana use does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Because he will not 
use illegal drugs in the future, confidence in his current reliability, trustworthiness and 
good judgment with respect to drug use is restored. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) applies because he has stated he will not use illegal drugs in the 
future. He has demonstrated his intent not to abuse drugs in the future by the passage 
of two years since his last use.  
 
AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply because abuse of prescription drugs was not a 
problem. AG ¶ 26(d) has limited applicability because did complete a ten week drug 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
8
abuse treatment program, there has been no recurrence of abuse, but there is no 
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct, which is 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
 
Applicant used marijuana after having started process to obtain a security 
clearance shows poor or questionable judgment. Under AG ¶ 16 conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include AG ¶ 16(d) “credible adverse 
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be 
sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information.” 
 
In completing his e-QIP, Applicant listed his underage possession of alcohol 
charge, but failed to list his possession of marijuana in the college dormitory. Failing to 
list the 2000 possession of marijuana incident does not prove the Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose information about his illegal drug use. The Applicant has denied 
intentional falsification. Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material 
fact in any written document or oral statement to the Government when applying for a 
security clearance is a security concern. However, every inaccurate statement is not an 
intentional falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it 
is done knowingly and willfully.  
 
Applicant was told the charge in this incident had been dismissed and his record 
expunged. Applicant was unsure if he needed to report the 2000 incident. He discussed 
it with his father, an individual who had experience completing security clearance 
applications. After hearing his testimony, observing his demeanor, and evaluating all the 
evidence of record, I found his testimony credible on the falsification issue. I am 
satisfied he did not intentionally falsify his e-QIP.  
 
Having previously found for Applicant as to his marijuana abuse, I find no 
additional disqualifying or additional security concerns under the personal conduct 
guideline. I find for Applicant as to SOR ¶ 2.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
 
 
 
9
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
Applicant used marijuana in 2000 and in 2006. AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying. AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses,“ and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,” apply. 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use was infrequent. He has a good employment record, 
acknowledged using marijuana was a bad decision and leads down the wrong road. 
Applicant’s last use was two years ago and his use prior to that was eight years ago. 
AG ¶ 32(a) “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies.  
 
Applicant is hard working, conscientious, and diligent young man. He accepts 
responsibility, uses excellent judgment in dealing with sensitive personnel information. 
AG ¶ 32(d) applies when there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement. AG ¶ 32(d) applies.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In 2000, as a college student 
 
 
 
10
Applicant smoked marijuana in his dorm room and was found guilty of possessing 
marijuana. Six years later, Applicant made a regrettable decision to again possess 
marijuana, which he recognizes was a stupid decision. He no longer uses marijuana or 
associates with those that do. At age 19 he was fishing in a state park and was cited for 
possession a beer while underage. His boss tried to tell the ranger it was his beer, but 
Applicant received the citation. Applicant is now 27, it is impossible for him to again be 
charged with being underage and in possession of alcohol.  
 
Applicant is hard working, diligent, and responsible. His friends and co-workers 
praise his character and dedication. When he completed his e-QIP he thought he did 
not have to list his 2000 possession charge because it was dismissed and his record 
expunged. He now knows better. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from 
his drug involvement, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Criminal Conduct: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a – 3.c: For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
 
