 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06685 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on July 20, 2006. On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; Guideline E, Personal Conduct; and Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On July 22, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 
29, 2008. The case was assigned to me on October 8, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on October 16, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 30, 
2008. The government offered Exhibits (Gov) 1 through 12, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted three documents 
 
2 
 
 
which were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – C and admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on November 7, 2008. The record was 
held open until November 14, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. 
No documents were submitted at the close of the record. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Notice of Hearing was sent out less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. 
Applicant waived the fifteen day notice requirement. (Tr at 12-13.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, received by DOHA on August 5, 2008, Applicant 
admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c – 1.e, 2.c - 2.e, 3.c, and 3.h. He denied SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 2.a, 2.b, 3.a, 3.b, and 3.d – 3.h.    
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old systems analyst employed by a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking a security clearance. He has worked for his current 
employer since May 2007. He has held a SECRET clearance since 1999. He has a high 
school diploma and three semesters of college credit. He currently attends an online 
university. He served on active duty in the United States Army for eight years from 1997 
– 2004. Applicant married in September 2000 and divorced in 2002. In 2003, he 
became engaged. The engagement ended several years later. He is currently single 
and has no children. (Tr at 6-9, 36, 63; Gov 1; Answer to SOR.)    
 
Applicant worked as a contractor in Iraq from 2003 – 2004; 2005 – 2006; and 
July 2006 to March 2007. (Tr at 36-40; Answer to SOR.)   
 
From 1997 to 2007, Applicant has been charged with, or investigated for, or cited 
for several criminal and traffic offenses.  In December 1997, he was arrested and 
charged with Theft of Private Property. He was caught shoplifting a leather jacket, 
valued at $475, from a department store. He was on active duty in the U.S. Army at the 
time. He pled guilty and was sentenced to pay a $350 fine, $184.23 in court costs, 
attend a life skills offender program, and nine months community supervision. (Tr at 34; 
Gov 2 at 8; Gov 3 at 4; Gov 4 at 2 – 7; Gov 7.) Applicant’s security clearance was 
revoked in October 1998. His security clearance was reinstated nine months later after 
he completed his community supervison. (Tr at 34; Gov 6.) 
 
In February 2000, Applicant was stationed in South Korea. On February 12, 
2000, he was walking home with friends after the bars closed.  He and his friends 
exchanged words with a couple. The woman smacked him. The husband threw a punch 
at him. Applicant hit the husband and knocked him out. He was taken to the police 
station for assault and battery. He was questioned and released to his military unit. His 
 
3 
 
 
commander referred him to anger management and he was given an oral reprimand.  
(Tr at 35-36, 42-43; Gov 8; Response to SOR.)       
 
On August 9, 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While 
License Suspended/Revoked. His car was stopped for traffic violations. It was 
discovered that his license was revoked. He was arrested and taken to jail. On 
November 5, 2001, Applicant appeared in court and pled guilty to Criminal Attempt of 
Driving While License Suspended. He was sentenced to a $200 fine and ordered to pay 
$69.25 in court costs.  (Tr at 36; Gov 4 at 9 – 12; Gov 9; Answer to SOR.)  
 
In June 2002, Applicant was cited for Parked in a Disabled Space. He was fined 
$372. (Tr at 38; Gov 3 at 5; Gov 5 at 2, 13; Answer to SOR.) He admits to parking in a 
disable space at a grocery store. (Tr at 38.)  
 
On May 1, 2004, Applicant was pulled over for a traffic violation. He had just 
purchased the car and was unable to produce the insurance paperwork or the car’s 
temporary tags. He was charged with Expired License Plates, a misdemeanor, and 
Failure to Maintain Financial Responsibility, a misdemeanor. He was found guilty of 
Failure to Maintain Financial Responsibility and fined $307. (Tr at 37; Gov 2 at 8-9; Gov 
3 at 5; Gov 4 at 13 – 14; Gov 5 at 2, 8 – 11; Answer to SOR.) 
 
On May 5, 2006, Applicant went to his best friend’s apartment complex to attend 
his best friend’s birthday party.  He parked his car in a fire zone. At around 11:45 pm, 
the party attendees were getting ready to go out. They were drinking champagne in the 
parking lot.  One of Applicant’s female friends turned up the radio volume in his car. An 
off-duty police officer who worked part-time as a security officer in the apartment 
complex approached the group due to the loud noise. He asked for the identity of all 
four individuals. It was discovered that Applicant had an outstanding warrant for issuing 
in bad check in October 2004.  He was arrested for the bad check offense. He was also 
cited for Loud Noise, Parking in a Fire Zone, and Open Container.  He paid a total of 
$1,015 in fines; $590 for Loud Noise, $135 for Parking in a Fire Zone, and $290 for 
Open Container.  On March 2, 2007, the bad check offense was dismissed because 
Applicant paid restitution. (Tr at 38-39; Gov 2 at 9-10; Gov 3 at 5; Gov 4 at 15-16; Gov 5 
at 2, 5 -7; Gov 10.)   
 
Applicant denies writing the bad check which is the basis for the bad check 
offense in October 2004. Although he has two checking accounts, he claims that he 
never writes checks. In 1997, he was the victim of identity theft. A mechanic stole his 
identity and charged approximately $20,000 in Applicant’s name. He believes the bad 
check charge is related to the identity theft. (Tr at 48, 57-58; Gov 3 at 5; Answer to 
SOR.) 
 
In April 2007, Applicant was cited for Speeding in a School Zone and Failure to 
Maintain Financial Responsibility. He paid a $133 fine. (Tr at 39; Gov 5 at 2-4.) 
Appellant has not been arrested since May 2006. He has received a traffic ticket. In July 
 
4 
 
 
2008, he was cited for speeding and expired tags in July 2008. He paid an $86 fine. (Tr 
at 64-65.) 
 
On July 20, 2006, Applicant completed an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP) in order to apply for a security clearance. Applicant 
answered “No” in response to “Section 23. Your Police Record: For this item report 
information regardless of whether the report in your case has been “sealed” or stricken 
from the court record. The single exception to this requirement is for certain convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607. f. In the last 
7 years, have you been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not 
listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 
unless the violation was alcohol or drug related.)” He did not list the offenses in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 2.c and 2.d.   
 
On the same e-QIP application, Applicant answered, “No” in response to “Section 
27. Your Financial Record. B. In the last 7 years, have you had your wages garnished 
or had any property repossessed for any reason?” Applicant’s background investigation 
revealed that he had an automobile repossessed in December 2005. He owes 
approximately $10,398 on the account. (SOR ¶ 3.c: Gov 11 at 6; Gov 12 at 2.)  
 
Applicant claims that he did not intend to falsify his security clearance 
questionnaire. He claims he did not recall his past arrests and the automobile 
repossession when completing his security clearance questionnaire. (Gov 3 at 6.)  He 
completed his security clearance questionnaire while he was in Iraq in July 2006. He 
claims he only had 30 minutes on the computer and the Internet was not very stable. He 
had to try three or four times to get in the program. He didn’t have any paperwork with 
him so he did not remember everything on his credit report and his “problems with 
authorities.” He was feeling pressure to turn the application in to his company so he 
submitted the questionnaire. (Tr at 39-40, 45-47.)  
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed additional delinquent accounts 
including a $4 cell phone account placed for collection in August 2003 (SOR ¶ 3.a: Gov 
11 at 10); a $460 internet account placed for collection in March 2004 (SOR ¶ 3.b: Gov 
11 at 9; Gov 12 at 2); a $660 credit card account charged off in January 2006 (SOR ¶ 
3.d: Gov 11 at 5; Gov 12 at 2); a $130 account placed for collection in June 2005 (SOR 
¶ 3.e: Gov 12 at 2); a $349 utility bill charged off in August 2006 (SOR ¶ 3.f: Gov 12 at 
2); a $156 cable bill placed for collection in October 2006 (SOR ¶ 3.g: Gov 12 at 2); and 
a $7,026 account owed to an online university, placed for collection in September 2007 
(SOR ¶ 3.h: Gov 12 at 2.).    
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant states that he incurred the delinquent debt 
because he relied on his fiance to pay his bills while he was in Iraq. She did not pay all 
of his bills. Applicant indicates that he made over $500,000 since 2002 and has paid off 
all of his debts with the exception of the automobile repossession. He indicated that he 
was currently paying on the repossession alleged in SOR ¶ 3.c. (Answer to SOR.) 
 
5 
 
 
At hearing, Applicant claims that he paid off all debts with the exception of SOR 
¶¶ 3.c and 3.h.  The debt in SOR ¶ 3.c is the automobile repossession. He let his fiancé 
use the car during his first deployment to Iraq. She had problems with it. Upon his return 
in 2005, he discovered the car had a lot of mechanical problems so he returned it to the 
lien holder. (Tr at 40-41.) Despite claiming that he was making payments towards the 
repossession in his answer to the SOR, Applicant has not contacted the creditor about 
making payments. He is not making payments because he feels like ‘they screwed me 
over.’ (Tr at 54-55.)  
 
While in Iraq in 2007, Applicant enrolled in an online university. He believed that 
the GI Bill covered his tuition. He did not understand how the GI Bill worked. He was 
enrolled in online courses when he was in Iraq and had to drop the course when he 
returned to the U.S. He owes $7,026 in tuition to the online university. (SOR ¶ 3.h.) He 
has been paying $400 a month towards this debt since July 2008. (Tr at 47-48; 55-58.)  
 
At hearing, Applicant did not have documentation verifying that he paid off the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 3.a, 3.b, 3.d, 3.e, 3.f, and 3.g. He also did not have 
documentation verifying that he was paying $400 a month to the online university for the 
debt owed them in SOR ¶ 3.h. The record was held open in order to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documentation. No additional documentation was received.   
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $4,192 (AE B at 2: assuming 
Applicant is paid twice a month.) His monthly expenses include rent $1,130, electric 
$100, gas for automobile $400, car insurance $170, cable $130, cell phone $80 and 
storage $70.  His total monthly expenses are $2,080. After expenses, he has $2,112 left 
over each month. He has one open credit card account with a $300 balance that he 
pays off each month. He is current on taxes. He owns two cars a 2002 Suburban and 
2002 Cadillac. Both are paid off. (Tr at 59 – 65.) A personal financial statement 
prepared on November 21, 2007, indicated that Applicant had $1,000 in savings, and 
$18,000 in stocks and bonds. (Gov 2 at 5.)   
 
Applicant separated from the U.S. Army as a staff sergeant. He received an 
honorable discharge. His awards and decorations include the Army Commendation 
Medal, Army Achievement Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Global 
War on Terrorism Service Medal, Army Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service 
Medal, Noncommissioned Officer’s Professional Development Ribbon and the Army 
Service Ribbon. (AE A.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply. Between 
December 1997 and May 2006, Applicant was arrested on five occasions. While 
Applicant was administratively punished for the assault incident which occurred while he 
was on active duty stationed in South Korea, he did commit an assault and was taken to 
the police station even though he was never formally charged.   
 
The Government produced substantial evidence by way of exhibits and testimony 
to raise CC DC ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15). An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
September 22, 2005.)   
   
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not 
apply. Considering Applicant’s arrest history, not enough time has elapsed to conclude 
that such conduct no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness or 
good judgment.  
 
CC MC ¶ 33(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) has the potential to apply. While it has been two years since 
Applicant’s last arrest in May 2006, concerns remain based on Applicant’s lack of 
candor about his arrest history on his security clearance questionnaire.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct concern. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
8 
 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Applicant’s omissions on his July 20, 2006, e-QIP application raises the potential 
application of Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities).  With respect to omitting his arrests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d and 
1.e in response to section 23(f) on his security clearance questionnaire, I find 
Applicant’s omission was deliberate. Applicant claims that he did not recall all of his 
arrests when completing his security clearance questionnaire. He claims it was difficult 
to complete the application while in Iraq and that he just answered “No” to complete the 
application. He admitted at hearing that he remembers his May 2006 arrest for Issuance 
of Bad Check. He was handcuffed and taken to the station. The arrest occurred less 
than two months prior to completing the security clearance application. I do not find 
Applicant’s explanation for not answering , “yes” to section 23(f) credible.  I find for 
Applicant with respect to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d. My basis for doing so, is 
that these do not appear to be criminal offenses. Applicant was cited as opposed to 
charged. Each offense appears to be civil in nature.   
 
 Applicant deliberately withheld the automobile repossession alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b 
in response to section 27(b). Based on his detailed description at hearing, Applicant 
clearly remembered this incident. I do not find his explanation for omitting this 
repossession in response to section 27(b) credible. 
   
 PC DC ¶ 16 (d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is 
not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rules violations.) applies 
with respect to Applicant’s traffic offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d, and 2.e. Applicant 
has a consistent pattern of rules violations which raise questions about his judgment, 
trustworthiness and reliability.  His lack of candor in completing his security clearance 
questionnaire raises further issues pertaining to his trustworthiness.   
    
 PC DC 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing) applies to Applicant’s case. It is reasonable to conclude that 
Applicant did not want to disclose his past criminal offenses when completing his 
 
9 
 
 
security clearance questionnaire because of the adverse affect it might have on getting 
a security clearance as well as the potential that he could lose his job. Applicant’s most 
recent arrest was two months prior to completing his security clearance questionnaire.   
 
 The personal conduct concern may be mitigated.  The following Personal 
Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) potentially apply: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not 
apply because Applicant did not disclose his arrest record or the automobile 
repossession until he was confronted with the facts during the interview conducted 
during his background investigation. If he was having problems completing the 
questionnaire, he could have informed his facility security officer (FSO) that he 
answered “No” to section 23(f) and section 27(b) due to computer problems. He could 
have informed the FSO of the correct information.    
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) does not apply.  The record reveals a ten-year history of 
questionable conduct by Applicant. His failure to be forthcoming about his past conduct 
continues to raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and judgment.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) does not apply. Although 
Applicant’s arrest history and financial problems were uncovered during his background 
investigation, the information was gathered from independent sources as opposed to 
Applicant.  His lack of candor makes him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation or 
duress.   
 
 None of the other PC MCs are relevant to the facts of Applicant’s case. He has 
not mitigated the concerns raised under personal conduct.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
10 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case.  Applicant accumulated a significant 
amount of delinquent debt since 2001. The SOR alleges eight debts, an approximate 
total balance of $19,183.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) potentially apply to Applicant’s case: FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. While Applicant 
claims he resolved all of the accounts with the exception of SOR ¶¶ 3.c and 3.h, he did 
not provide proof that the debts were resolved. Applicant has the burden to prove that 
his debts have been resolved. Applicant’s failure to prove that the debts are resolved 
raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Although Applicant 
divorced in 2001, he did not describe the financial impact his divorce had on his 
finances. Between 2003 to March 2007, Applicant earned good money as a contractor 
in Iraq. His financial problems are the result of financial irresponsibility as opposed to 
circumstances beyond his control.  
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. Although he 
claims that majority of the debts were paid, he provided no verification that the debts 
were resolved.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. While Applicant claims that most of 
the debts are paid, it was his burden to provide proof that he resolved the accounts. He 
indicated that he was making $400 monthly payments towards the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.h since July 2008. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit 
documents verifying payment. No documents were submitted. For these reasons, I 
cannot conclude Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
            
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service and his record of no subsequent criminal arrests for over a period of two years.  
However, he continues to be cited for traffic infractions, the most recent incident 
occurring in July 2008. Considering his history of criminal and traffic offenses, not 
enough time has passed to mitigate the concerns raised under Guideline J or Guideline 
E. Applicant’s deliberate omission of his arrest history and automobile repossession on 
his security clearance questionnaire raises further doubts about his trustworthiness and 
reliability. Although Applicant claims to have resolved the majority of his delinquent 
debts, he provided no proof verifying repayment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under criminal conduct, personal conduct, and 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2. Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3. Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.h:    Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
