KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The federal government need not wait until an applicant mishandles sensitive
information before it denies or revokes access to such information.  Trustworthiness
determinations are not limited to consideration of job performance or on duty conduct.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-07799.a1
DATE: 12/05/2008
DATE: December 5, 2008
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 07-07799
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On January 28, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 19, 2008, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Robert J. Tuider denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse trustworthiness
determination is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed because the Judge did
not give sufficient weight to Applicant’s mitigating evidence which he contends showed that his
financial problems arose from circumstances that were beyond his control, and that he has now paid
off, or arranged to pay off, all his outstanding debts.  Applicant also argues that a trustworthiness
determination based on his personal credit history is not indicative of his ability to maintain
confidentiality of sensitive information.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge
erred. 
The Directive presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under
any of its Guidelines and an applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-
16376 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2007).  The federal government need not wait until an applicant
actually mishandles or fails to properly handle sensitive information before it can deny or revoke
access to such information.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-09293 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2007).
Trustworthiness determinations are not limited to consideration of an applicant's job performance
or conduct during duty hours, and off-duty conduct can be relevant in assessing an applicant's
trustworthiness eligibility. See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-07581 at 2 (App. Bd. May 17, 2007).  An
applicant with good or exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative
trustworthiness implications.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-09293 supra at 2.  The Directive's
Guidelines set forth a variety of examples of off-duty conduct and circumstances which are of
trustworthiness concern to the government and mandate a whole-person analysis to determine an
applicant's trustworthiness eligibility.  A whole-person analysis is not confined to the workplace. Id.
In this case, the Judge based his adverse findings, in substantial part, on the fact that
Applicant “did not provide any documentation” that he had paid off, or was making payments on,
a number of the specific debts listed in the SOR.  Decision at 3.  He also noted that “Applicant did
not provide any good character evidence”  Id. at 4.  As a result, the Judge concluded that Applicant
had not “satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion.”  Id. at 6.  The Board has previously noted that
it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of
individual debts.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008); ISCR Case No.
06-17520 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 20, 2007).
Once the government presents evidence raising trustworthiness concerns, the burden shifts
to the applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating
3
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As
the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at
2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence,
or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate
the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a lengthy history of not meeting financial
obligations.  The Judge weighed the limited mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of
relevant conditions and factors.  He found in favor of Applicant with respect to two of the SOR
factual allegations.  However, he reasonably explained why the evidence which Applicant had
presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s trustworthiness concerns.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination under Guideline F is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple    
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; William S. Fields      
4
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
