1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-02715
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: James Mckee, Esquire
February 11, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(eQip), on October 17, 2005.  On July 11, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines C and B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on September 7, 2007,and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on December 3, 2007.  A notice of hearing was issued on January 4, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for January 29, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented
five exhibits.  The Applicant called one witness, presented one exhibit and testified on
2
his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on February 7, 2008.  Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Iran.  Applicant’s Counsel
had no objection.  (Tr. p. 16).  The request and the attached documents were not
admitted into evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 52 years of age and has a Bachelor’s
Degree.  He is employed as a Repair Manager for a defense contractor since August
2005.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense
industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has acted in such a
way as to show a preference for another country over the United States.
In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 7, 2007, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in allegations 1(a), and 2(b) of the SOR, with explanations.  He
denied the factual allegations in allegations 2(a), and 2(c) of the SOR. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
The Applicant was born in Iran in 1954 to Iranian parents.  He grew up in Iran
and came to the United States in 1978, on a student visa to attend college.  A year later,
in 1979, he married a United States citizen, received a green card, and started the
naturalization process.  In August 1988, he became a naturalized United States citizen.
Before they divorced in 1989, the Applicant and his wife had two children who were
born in the United States.    
Since moving to the United States in 1979, the Applicant has traveled to Iran on
three separate occasions.  In 1982, prior to becoming a United States citizen, he
traveled to Iran with his wife and daughter to introduce them to his family there.  On that
occasion, he used his original Iranian passport that he came to the United States with to
enter and exit Iran.  The Applicant applied for and was issued an Iranian passport in
August 2002, after becoming a naturalized United States citizen in August 1988.  The
Applicant later applied for and obtained a United States passport in 2003.  (See
Government Exhibit 5).  Instead of using his United States passport, the Applicant used
3
his Iranian passport to enter and exit Iran when he traveled to Iran from December 15,
2002 through January 2003, when his mother died, and from December 17, 2005
through January 2006, when his father had heart surgery.  (See Government Exhibit 4).
When asked why he did not use his United States passport, or get a visa to travel to
Iran instead, the Applicant stated that he had some fear of traveling to Iran on the
United States passport.  He has less fear traveling on an Iranian passport.  (Tr. p. 60).   
      
Although his Iranian passport expired in August 2007, the Applicant currently
maintains it in his file cabinet.  (Tr. p. 61).  If his father passes away, he would like to
travel to Iran to pay respect.  He states, however, that he would not renew his Iranian
passport, but instead he would look into how to get to Iran by using his United States
passport.  (Tr. p. 65).  He also stated that he would renounce his Iranian citizenship if it
is required.  However, he has not investigated the process of renouncing his Iranian
citizenship.  (Tr. p. 63). 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant’s father and six sisters are citizens and residents of Iran.  His
sisters have children who are citizens and reside in Iran.  The Applicant contacts his
family in Iran on a regular basis to stay abreast of information concerning his father’s
health and how the whole family is doing in general.  He contacts his sister who lives
with his father about once every three or four weeks.  (Tr. pp. 49 and 54).  He speaks to
his father about once every six months.  (Tr. p. 66).  In regard to his other sisters, he
contacts one or two of them about once a year by telephone and one of them by e-mail
on various occasions.  (Tr. pp. 54, and 66-67).  Their attempts to contact him varies.
One of his sisters contacts him by e-mail about once a month, sometimes once every
six months, as it varies, to discuss family matters and to ask about the children.  (Tr. P.
72-73).  He recently sent photos by e-mail of his daughter’s graduation to one of his
sisters.  (Tr. p. 67).  
Except for a sister who is a public school principal in Iran, none of the Applicant’s
family in Iran are employed for or agents of the Iranian government.  His father is 79
years old and sells fishing equipment.  One of his sisters is unemployed and is
financially supported by their father.  Another one of his sisters owns a rope making
factory, and three are housewives supported by their husbands.  None of the sister’s
husbands work for the Iranian government.  
The Applicant’s brother resides in the United States and is here on a student
visa. He is working as an engineer and is aware that the Applicant is applying for a
security clearance.  The Applicant’s brother finished his two years compulsory military
service in Iran before coming to the United States.         
4
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Iran.  The
fact that Iran has no diplomatic relations with the United States, Iran’s efforts to acquire
nuclear weapons and other weapon of mass destruction, its support for and involvement
in international terrorism, it’s support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process, and it’s dismal human rights records.  I have considered the fact that Iranian
Government officials at all levels commit serious abuses of their power and authority.
It’s Totalitarian Government and the level of insurgent troops there, the fact that Iran
has terrorists activities, and is rampant with crime and instability.  The overall
deteriorating security situation in Iran, the human rights abuses, and the government
corruption elevates the cause for concern in the case.  The United States may face no
greater challenge from a single country than from Iran.    
The Applicant’s section head and supervisor who hired the Applicant, has regular
contact with him at work, and who evaluates his work performance, testified that the
Applicant’s work performance is of high quality, as evidenced by his early promotion,
which is unprecedented.  With regard to his character, the Applicant is considered to be
extremely dependable, honest, maintains a high level of integrity and is a loyal citizen of
the United States.  The Applicant has never been seen to fail to carry out necessary
precautions or procedures related to security.  The Applicant’s Section head knows
nothing about the Applicant’s family in Iran and has only socialized with him at work
functions. 
A letter of recommendation from a co-worker who has worked with the Applicant
for two years attests to his great character and high integrity.  He considers the
Applicant to be loyal, honest, dedicated to his job and family and one of the most
genuine people he has ever known.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit A).  
      
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
5
Foreign Preference
9.  The Concern.  When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or he may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
10.  (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
11.  (a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign
country;
11.  (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
11.  (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated.
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
6
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline C (foreign preference),
and Guideline B (foreign influence) that establishes doubt about a person's judgment,
7
reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown
between Applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified
information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign preference and has foreign
connections may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to
the interests of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises
legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the
interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government
must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to
abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Preference, Disqualifying Condition 10(a) exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the
foreign citizenship of a family member applies.  However, Mitigation Conditions 11(a)
dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country, 11(b)
the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship, and 11(e) the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated also apply.
The Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States.  It is noted that the
Applicant came to the United States as a teenager, and that he has worked for more
than 30 years in the United States.  He has two children who are native born American
citizens and are educated and successful.  However, after becoming a United States
citizen in August 1988, and after having applied for and obtained a United States
passport in August 2003, the Applicant used his Iranian passport to enter and exit Iran
from December 15, 2002, through January 2003 and from December 17, 2005, through
January 2006.  As he indicated, he felt less fear to use his Iranian passport than if he
used his United States passport to enter and exit Iran.  Although his Iranian passport
has now expired, he has not thrown it away, surrendered it, or destroyed it.  Instead, he
maintains it in his file cabinet.  He indicates that he will not renew it, but when he wants
8
to travel to Iran in the future, he will inquire as to how he can use his United States
passport.   
The Applicant has also indicated that he is willing to renounce his Iranian
citizenship if required to do so by DoD, yet he has not done so.  He has not even taken
the time to investigate the matter and figure out how to do it.  However, this, under the
circumstances of this case, I find for the Applicant under Guideline C (Foreign
Preference). 
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  None of
the mitigation conditions apply. 
It is also acknowledged that the Applicant has a brother who resides in the
United States.  On the other hand, the Applicant has many family members, including
his father and six sisters, who are citizens of and reside in Iran with whom he maintains
a close and continuing relationship. He also has extended family members, including
nieces and nephews, who reside in Iran.  He is very close to his father and six sisters in
Iran and has regular ongoing contact with them by telephone and e-mail.  Except for his
sister who is a public school principal, there is no evidence that any of his family
members in Iran are associated in any way with the Iranian government.  There is,
however, evidence of a close bond and strong evidence of affection with his immediate
family.  This bond and affection with his family could potentially cause the Applicant to
become subject to foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Moreover, the current political situation in Iran elevates the cause for concern in this
case.  The possibility of foreign influence exists that could create the potential for
conduct resulting in the compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is
vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline
B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.
Guideline C is found for the Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: For the Applicant
9
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
Subparas. 2.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 2.b.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 2.c.: Against the Applicant
 
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
