KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Judge’s decision was premised on his conclusion that Applicant’s falsification was
isolated. At the hearing, Applicant offered inconsistent explanations for his false answer to
question 24 of his security clearance application.  The Board concludes that this amounts a
second falsification.  Furthermore Applicant provided false information in an interrogatory. 
Therefore, the Judge’s premise for applying the mitigating conditions was not valid. Favorable
decision reversed.
CASENO: 07-08640.a1
DATE: 12/15/2008
DATE: December 15, 2008
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-08640
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Department Counsel does not challenge the Judge’s favorable findings and conclusions under Guideline H.1
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 12, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing, which was held on August 13, 2008.  On
September 19, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason granted Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1
Department Counsel raises the following issues on appeal: (a) whether the Judge erred in his
application of Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions 17(c) and 17(d); and (b) whether the Judge’s
favorable whole-person analysis is unsustainable because it is unsupported by the totality of the
record evidence.  For the following reasons, the Board reverses the Judge’s favorable decision. 
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:
On November 24, 2006, Applicant certified that the information he provided in his security
clearance application was true and made in good faith.  Yet, in response to question 24 a., requiring
information about drug use since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, Applicant answered “no,” even
though he used marijuana about once a week between 2001 and late 2004 or early 2005.  He initially
characterized the omission as a mistake at the hearing, but he knew he was hiding four years of
marijuana use with his “no” answer to question 24 a.  He answered “no” to question 24 a. because
he believed that telling the truth would spoil his chances of receiving a security clearance.  
Department Counsel does not specifically challenge any of the Judge’s findings.  He does,
however, describe record evidence in the statement of facts portion of his brief that are not
mentioned in the Judge’s decision.  The Board concludes that some of this evidence is relevant to
a resolution of the issues raised on appeal.  The pertinent evidence is as follows: Prior to the hearing,
Applicant responded to two sets of interrogatories.  Because his responses to the first set of
interrogatories were unclear, Applicant was sent another set, which he signed on October 22, 2007.
In response to the second set of interrogatories, Applicant denied ever purchasing any illegal
substance.  At the hearing, however, Applicant admitted that he purchased “nickel” and “dime”
quantities of marijuana from his friends.   
“[T]he offense is so minor, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances2
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”
“[T]he individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken3
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.”
3
B. Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of fact is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less th an the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s finding from being supported bu substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give
deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
As Department Counsel does not specifically challenge the Judge’s findings of fact, the
issues raised on appeal are more appropriately analyzed in terms of challenges to the Judge’s
conclusions.  This analysis is included in the following section.
 
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A. Conclusions
The Judge reached the following pertinent conclusions: The government established a case
for disqualification under Guideline E, but Applicant mitigated the security concerns.  Specifically,
 regarding the Applicant’s hearing statement indicating the omission was a mistake, the Judge did
not believe that Applicant was trying to conceal his marijuana use a second time, given the detailed
account he provided of his marijuana history in his answers to interrogatory questions and the
generally credible nature of Applicant’s testimony.  Also, the Judge concluded that Personal Conduct
Mitigating Conditions 17(c)  and 17(d)  were applicable because Applicant’s deliberate falsification2 3
occurred only once, even though the falsification occurred less than 16 months before the hearing.
Additionally, the Judge concluded that the two mitigating conditions applied because within the last
three and closer to four years, Applicant admitted the illegality of his drug use, stopped using
marijuana, discontinued his ties with his drug-using friends, and developed a good work reputation
because of his trustworthiness and reliability.  Regarding the whole-person analysis, the Judge
concluded that weighing against the deliberate falsification that occurred less than 16 months ago
is favorable evidence indicating that Applicant will not repeat this conduct in the future, specifically
his ceasing of marijuana use driven by a concern for his future, his not wanting to be caught by a
drug test, the ceasing of his association with drug users, his good employment record since 2005, his
Transcript, p. 18.4
4
coworker’s favorable assessment of his professionalism and dependability, and his remedial action
of paying off expensive, high-interest loans.
B. Discussion
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “[N]o one
has a right to a security clearance. . . The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 581, 528 (1988).  The Appeal Board may reverse a Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or
revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
Department Counsel contends that the Judge’s decision is not sustainable because he
erroneously applied Mitigating Conditions 17(c) and 17(d) in Applicant’s favor when the evidence
did not support it.  Department Counsel correctly points out that the Judge’s application of the
mitigating conditions was predicated largely on his determination that Applicant’s deliberate
falsification occurred only once.  Department Counsel’s assertion that the evidence does not support
the Judge’s characterization has merit.  In addition to the act of falsification alleged in the statement
of reasons, Applicant responded “No” to an interrogatory question asking whether or not he had ever
purchased illegal drugs, when, in fact, he had purchased marijuana.  At the hearing, when he was
initially asked about the circumstances of his answer to question 24 of the security clearance
application, Applicant indicated that his response to the question was a product of an honest mistake
arising from a misreading of the question.  After more questioning by the Judge, Applicant stated,
“On the first one, I’m going to be honest,”  and then proceeded to admit that when he was answering4
question 24, he thought saying he had smoked marijuana would hinder him from getting a security
clearance.  Although the Judge concluded that Applicant’s initial explanation about his question 24
answer was not a second attempt to conceal his marijuana use, Department Counsel argues
persuasively that, irrespective of motive, Applicant’s “mistake” explanation at the hearing was, on
its face, untruthful.  Given the record evidence to the contrary, the Judge’s conclusion that
Applicant’s falsification occurred only once is not sustainable, and as a result his application of
Mitigating Conditions 17(c) And 17(d) are significantly undercut.
Department Counsel also persuasively argues that other components listed in Mitigating
Condition 17(c) are not supported by the record evidence.  No evidence was presented to indicate
that Applicant’s falsification occurred under unique circumstances that were unlikely to recur.  The
record evidence indicates that Applicant provided the false answer for the predictable reason that he
feared his true record would diminish his chances of receiving a security clearance.  The record
5
evidence also indicates that the making of false statements by Applicant did, in fact, recur.
Mitigating Condition 17(c) also speaks in terms of the passage of time since the incident.  The Board
does not set forth bright line parameters concerning the amount of time passage necessary to mitigate
security-significant behavior.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0018 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 11, 2000).
Nevertheless, regarding the facts and circumstances of this case, which include an initial falsification
that occurred 16 months prior to the close of the record, and evidence of lack of candor that occurred
subsequent to the initial falsification including the date of the hearing, there is insufficient evidence
to support the notion that so much time has passed that the behavior does not cast doubt on
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Regarding Mitigating Condition 17(d), the Judge found that it applied because Applicant’s
falsification occurred only once, he admitted his illegal drug usage, stopped using illegal drugs,
discontinued ties with his drug-using friends, and developed a good work reputation for
trustworthiness and reliability.  Department Counsel persuasively argues that the evidence that
Applicant stopped using marijuana in late 2004 and disassociated himself from drug-using friends
in approximately 2003, while it assists in mitigating concerns about drug involvement under
Guideline H, does little to inform an analysis of the security concerns brought on by Applicant’s
falsifications.  The Judge’s decision contains no explanation as to how the cessation of drug use and
the disassociation from drug users alleviated any factors that caused the untrustworthy behavior,
especially since the falsifications occurred well after the time frame when Applicant, by his own
reckoning, ended the drug usage and the associations.  There is also no evidence in the record
indicating that Applicant obtained any counseling in relation to his falsifications.  The Judge’s
application of Mitigating Condition 17(d) is not sustainable.
Department Counsel also asserts that the Judge’s whole-person analysis is unsustainable
because it runs contrary to, and is unsupported by, the totality of the record evidence.  A review of
the Judge’s whole-person analysis reveals that the Judge weighed the deliberate falsification that
occurred less than 16 months before the close of the record against favorable evidence that the Judge
concluded persuasively established that Applicant will not repeat the conduct in the future.  Some
of the evidence cited by the Judge in support of this conclusion is the same evidence he cited in
support of the application of Mitigating Condition 17(d)(ceasing marijuana use, ending troubling
associations, etc.).  Again, while these factors speak directly to mitigation of drug usage under
Guideline H, they bear little relationship to the ultimate determination of Applicant’s security
worthiness in light of evidence of falsification under Guideline E.  Additionally, the Judge mentions
Applicant’s good employment record, character evidence from co-workers, and the paying off of
expensive, high-interest loans as evidence of Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability.  However,
the favorable evidence cited by the Judge is insufficient to overcome the government’s concerns
about falsification in this case, especially in light of the fact that the record establishes that Applicant
engaged in multiple acts of falsification, rather than one isolated instance.
   
Conclusion        
6
Considering the record evidence as a whole, Department Counsel has identified errors by the
Judge which, taken in their entirety, warrant reversal of the Judge’s favorable security clearance
decision.
Order
The decision of the Administrative Judge granting Applicant a security clearance is REVERSED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
