                                                                
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 07-07817 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigative Processing (e-
QIP) on January 19, 2007.  Applicant also submitted a Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86) on June 20, 2005.  He updated that application and re-signed and re-dated it on 
January 23, 2008.  On February 22, 2008, The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H for drug involvement and Guideline J for criminal conduct.  The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.   
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 28, 2008, and answered 
the allegations in writing on March 18, 2008.  He admitedall of the allegations under 
Guidelines H and J, and requested a decision on the record without a hearing.  On 
March 2, 2008, pursuant to Paragraph E3.1.7 of the Directive, Department Counsel 
requested a hearing in this case.  On August 13, 2008, Department Counsel amended 
 
2 
 
the SOR to add seven allegations under Guideline E for personal conduct.  Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the amended SOR on September 6, 2008, and admitted the 
allegations under Guideline E with explanation.   
 
 Department Counsel was prepared to proceed with the case on October 27, 
2008, and the case was assigned to me the same day.  DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on November 3, 2008, for a hearing on November 19, 2008.  I convened the 
hearing as scheduled.  The government offered 15 exhibits, marked Government 
Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 15, which were received without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his behalf.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on December 
1, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old and has worked for the last four years as a telecom 
technician for a defense contractor.  He held an interim security clearance since working 
with the defense contractor.  He is a high school graduate with some college courses.  
He is married with no children.  Applicant graduated from high school in June 1999 and 
entered active duty with the Navy in September 1999.  He served on active duty for over 
five years until December 2004 as an operations specialist radar technician.  He held a 
security clearance while on active duty.  He received an administrative discharge under 
other than honorable conditions in lieu of a court-martial (Tr. 47-50; Gov. Ex. 1, E-QIP, 
dated January 19, 2007; Gov. Ex. 13, DD-214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from 
Active Duty, dated December 4, 2004). 
 
 Applicant received three non-judicial punishments while on active duty.  In 
December 2001, he received a non-judicial punishment for misbehavior of a sentinel 
when he fell asleep while serving as a lookout on a cruiser.  He was sentenced to 15 
days restriction to his ship and 15 days extra duty (Gov. Ex. 7, Administrative Remarks, 
dated December 18, 2001).  In November 2003, Applicant received non-judicial 
punishment for being drunk and disorderly and unfit for duty.  He was sentenced to a 
reduction in grade, suspended for six months, forfeiture of $200 pay per month for one 
month, and 30 days restriction to the ship and extra duty (Gov. Ex. 8, Court 
Memorandum dated November 18, 2003).  He received another non-judicial punishment 
in January 2004 for failure to obey the order on his restriction.  The suspension of his 
reduction was vacated and he received 15 additional days of restriction and extra duty 
(Tr. 54-59; Gov. Ex. 9, Court Memorandum, dated January 13, 2004; Gov. Ex. 10, 
Captain's Mast, dated January 13, 2004).   
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 2004 for possession and use of marijuana on 
various occasions from January 2003 until June 2004.  Applicant admitted to Japanese 
police that he used and possessed marijuana (Gov. Ex. 11, Statement, dated October 
5, 2004).  On the advice of counsel, Applicant submitted a request for separation in lieu 
of court-martial.  His request was granted and he was separated in December 2004 
under other than honorable conditions (Gov. Ex. 12, Administrative Separation, dated 
 
3 
 
October 28, 2004; See also, Gov. Ex. 14, Federal Bureau of Investigation Criminal 
Justice Information, dated February 13, 2007). 
 
 Applicant admits that he used marijuana about five or six times in high school 
starting when he was 15 years old.  He admits to using marijuana about ten times while 
on active duty and while holding a security clearance spread out over the years of 2002 
and 2003.  He was tested by urinalysis numerous times while on active duty but never 
tested positive.  He admitted to the use and possession of marijuana in 2004 because 
he was advised if he did not admit to the offense he would be turned over to the 
Japanese criminal authorities and jailed in a Japanese jail.  He did not want to be sent 
to a Japanese jail (Tr-51-54; Gov. Ex. 3, Interview, dated April 9, 2007).  Applicant 
stated that his last use of marijuana was shortly before being apprehended in 2004.  He 
was last around people who used marijuana in 2005 when he attend a family function 
where some attendees used marijuana.  He has never been involved with law 
enforcement except for the offenses listed above during his time in the Navy.  He has 
not received any counseling for drug use or been advised he is a drug abuser or is drug 
dependent (Tr. 59-62).   
 
 Applicant submitted his first security clearance application when he entered 
active duty.  Even though he had used marijuana in high school starting in 1995, he 
answered "NO" to question 24 concerning the use of controlled substances since the 
age of 16 or in the last seven years.  Applicant stated he was advised by the recruiter 
not to include his use of drugs in high school on the application (Tr. 66-67; Gov. Ex. 15, 
Questionnaire for National Security Position, dated March 27, 1999).  Applicant 
completed a new security clearance application in June 2006 when he started 
employment for the defense contractor.  He updated that form in January 2008.  He 
answered "No" to questions 27 and 28 on both applications, concerning his use of 
illegal drugs in the last seven years or while holding a security clearance (Tr. 62-63; 
Gov. Ex. 5, Security Clearance Application, dated June 20, 2005).  He also answered 
"No" to questions 24a and b on a security clearance application submitted on January 
19, 2007 (Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated January 19, 2007).   
  
 Applicant responded to Interrogatories asking about his use of illegal drugs.  He 
responded that he experimented with marijuana once or twice on weekends over two 
months in high school but stopped in September 1996.  He stopped because he was 
more into sports. He stated that using illegal substance was one of his worst mistakes 
and he stays away for places where drugs are located as well as people using drugs 
(Gov. Ex. 4, Interrogatories, dated December 14, 2007). 
 
 A 20 year experienced security agent interviewed Applicant about his drug use.  
The agent had copies of a Navy Criminal Investigation Service (NCIS) report stating that 
Applicant admitted using marijuana in Japan in the summer of 2004.  Applicant denied 
drug use in Japan in 2004 and admitted only that he used marijuana a few times in high 
school when he was 15 years old.  He informed the agent that he admitted to the NCIS 
agent and the Japanese police that he used drugs because of the NCIS agent's threat 
to place him in a Japanese jail.  Applicant insisted he did not use illegal drugs in the 
 
4 
 
Navy.  The agent did not believe Applicant told the truth at the interview (Tr. 30-40; Gov. 
Ex. 3, Interview, dated April 9, 2007). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he did not tell the truth about his 
marijuana use in the Navy.  Concerning the interview with the security agent, Applicant 
admitted that he did not tell the truth stating: 
 
I'm not denying that, what Agent (X) said about me not being truthful about 
the marijuana usage.  I mean I admitted that in a document and that was 
sent to DOHA.  They have that on file, and, honestly, I was scared of 
losing my security clearance.  That's why I wasn't truthful about it and I 
realize it was a bad decision, I know it was a bad decision and if I could 
take it back I would, but, just being honest, I was scared and I wasn't 
truthful about it. 
 
Quite honestly, I'm basically here just to own up everything that's put out 
there.  I mean, I've been truthful, I haven't been truthful before, but I'm 
being truthful now and everything, the whole allegations have been 
against me, and basically, I'm here just to own up to it, whatever, I have to 
own up to." (Tr. 45-46). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
 
5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
substances, and include those listed on the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.  Drug 
abuse is the illegal use of a drug or the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 24). 
 The information in the exhibits presented at the hearing by the government and 
Applicant's answers and testimony are sufficient to raise Drug Involvement Disqualifying 
Conditions (DI DC) AG ¶ 25(a) "any drug use", DI DC AG ¶ 25(c) "illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution", and DI DC AG ¶ 25(g) "any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance".  It is clear from Applicant's own statement that he used marijuana in high 
school until 1999, and from about 2002 until 2004 while in the Navy and while holding a 
security clearance.  His drug use was continuous and not simply drug experimentation 
and causes security clearance concerns. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate his use of illegal drug (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15).  An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government.   
 
6 
 
 I considered Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) ¶ 26(a) "the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment"; and DI MC ¶ 26(b) "a 
demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) disassociation from 
drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where 
drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation".  Applicant's last use of 
an illegal drug was in the summer of 2004.  While he had an opportunity to use illegal 
drugs in the summer of 2005, he did not do so.  It has been four years since his last 
reported use of illegal drugs, and there has been no adverse information about drug use 
since then.  Applicant has stated his intent not to use drugs in the future. He stated he 
no longer goes to places where drugs are used or associates with people that use 
drugs.  His testimony is sufficient information to establish he no longer uses illegal 
drugs.  Additionally, sufficient time has passed since his last use of illegal drugs to 
indicate he no longer uses illegal drugs.  Applicant met his heavy burden of establishing 
that his past drug use does not now raise questions concerning his reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  I find for 
Applicant as to drug involvement under Guideline H. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.   
 
 The security clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and 
accurate information during the security clearance process.  If a person conceals or 
provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function properly to 
ensure that granting access to classified information is in the best interest of the United 
States Government.  Applicant’s false answers to questions on his security clearance 
applications, his answers to the questions in the Interrogatories, as well as the answers 
to the security agent concerning drug use raise security concerns under Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct investigations, to 
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness); and PC DC AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately 
providing false and misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative). 
 
 
 
7 
 
 Appellant admitted he provided false information on his security clearance 
applications, as well as in response to the Interrogatory questions, and to the security 
agent.  He admitted at the hearing that he had not been truthful about his use of drugs 
in the past.  At the hearing, Applicant was truthful about his past drug use and his past 
false answers during the security clearance process.  Applicant's admission leaves no 
doubt that he deliberately provided false information with the intent to deceive up to the 
hearing part of the security clearance process.  I find that Applicant deliberately 
provided false information on his security applications and to security investigators.  
 
 I considered all of the Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 17 
and determine none apply.  Applicant did not make a good faith effort to correct 
erroneous or inaccurate information even though he had numerous opportunities to do 
so.  He did not even tell the truth to the security agent In April 2007 even after being 
reminded of his statement to the Japanese police and NCIS agents.  He did not provide 
correct information until he decided to tell the truth at the hearing.  He was not 
erroneously advised by anyone to provide false information.  His untruthful statements 
are numerous and the last false statement to the security agent was only a little over a 
year ago.   
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 30)  Applicant violated federal law by 
knowingly and willfully providing false information on his security clearance application 
and to a security investigator (18 U.S.C. § 1001) but this was not alleged as a criminal 
conduct security concern and will not be considered a criminal conduct security 
concern.  Applicant was discharged from the Navy with a discharge under other than 
honorable conditions in lieu of court-martial for use and possession of an illegal drug, 
marijuana.  This conduct raises Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) AG 
¶ 31 (a) "a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses", and CD DC AG ¶ 31 (c) 
"allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted".   
 
I have considered Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition (CC MC) ¶ 32(a) "so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cost doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment."  The use of an illegal drug in 
violation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice took place over four years ago.  
Applicant received a discharge from the Navy under other than honorable conditions in 
lieu of court-martial for this criminal act.  The passage of time and the unusual nature of 
the offense show it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  I find for Applicant as to criminal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that Applicant served 
over five years on active duty in the Navy and has held a security clearance for a 
number of years.  I considered that his employment record is good and that he has not 
tested positive for drug use.  I considered that Applicant used illegal drugs for many 
years and then lied about his use on security clearance applications and to a security 
investigator.  Applicant has now admitted that he provided false information with the 
intent to deceive.  Acknowledging deceitful conduct is a step in rehabilitation.  But 
Applicant had about five opportunities to provide correct information and did not do so.  
He only recently spoke the truth at the hearing.  Sufficient time to establish a record of 
truthfulness has not passed to indicate that Applicant will continue to tell the truth in the 
future.  Only a period of time of truthfulness will overcome the previous numerous 
untruthfulness.  The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant's continued truthfulness.  I have doubts about his eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance because he repeatedly provided false information on his security 
clearance applications and to a security investigator.  For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct.  He 
has mitigated security concerns for his criminal conduct and drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
9 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
