1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-05168
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on September 5,
2005. On February 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on October 28, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November
18, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 9, 2008. The
Government offered Exhibits (GE 1-8), which were received without objection. Applicant
testified in his own behalf. He submitted Exhibits (AE A-D), without objection. DOHA
2
received the transcript on December 17, 2008. Based upon a review of the record,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 10, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.m and 1.o through 1.s of the SOR. He denied the other
allegations in the SOR because the debts were paid or he had no knowledge of them
and disputed them. He provided additional information to support his request for
eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1985 and from college in 2002. Applicant lived with his girlfriend for
approximately 17 years (1987-2001). He married in 2004. He has three natural children
and two stepchildren. He has been employed since late 2004 with his current employer
(GE 1).
Applicant’s longtime girlfriend opened credit card accounts without his knowledge
during the course of their relationship. However, Applicant acknowledged that they both
accumulated some credit card debt. Applicant has worked his entire life but had a
period of unemployment for two months in 2004 (Tr. 30). Applicant was ill and out of
work about a month ago and lost wages. Due to Applicant’s illness when he was
unemployed, he incurred medical debt because he did not have medical insurance (Tr.
41).
Applicant’s wife lost her job recently. She found a new job but at a lower pay rate.
They have two children in college and are paying for their education. Due to a lower
income for Applicant and his wife, he was in arrears in his child support. He is current
with his child support at this time. Applicant also experienced some difficulty during the
recent hurricane. He estimates that due to hotel costs he incurred about $700 in
additional expenses (Tr. 34). 
The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts/collection accounts including, unpaid
medical debt, six collection accounts and two federal tax liens. The total amount of the
delinquent debt is approximately $56,900.
SOR ¶ 1.a is a federal tax lien filed in 2002 in the amount of $6,165. Applicant
admitted that he owed the debt. Applicant has paid this amount to the IRS. (AE A ).
SOR ¶ 1.b is a federal tax lien filed in 2006 in the amount of $4,193. Applicant is
paying $150 a month through a garnishment (AE B). His balance is approximately
$2,000.
SOR ¶ 1.c is a charged off account in the amount of $15,567. This account is for
a vehicle that was repossessed in 2005.  He is trying to settle the debt but does not
3
have the sum of money needed to do so at this time. Applicant has not paid the
account.
SOR ¶ 1.d is for a charged off credit card account in the amount of $1,372.
Applicant has not paid the amount and is disputing the information.
SOR ¶ 1.e is for a medical account in the amount of $361. Applicant has not paid
this account.
SOR ¶ 1.f is for a collection account in the amount of $240. Applicant has not
paid this account.
SOR ¶ 1.g is for a collection account to a phone company in the amount of $164.
Applicant has not paid the account because he is disputing the information. He filed a
challenge with the credit reporting company. ( Tr. 39). He also has not paid the account
because it is “old” and is deleted from his credit report.
SOR ¶ 1.h. is another charged off account in the amount of $227. Applicant has
not paid this account.
SOR ¶ 1.I is a collection account in the amount of $426. Applicant has not paid
this account because the file is deleted from the credit report. This account is one that
his ex-girlfriend opened without his knowledge but he admits that his name is also on
the account and he is responsible for it.
SOR ¶1.j is a charged off medical account in the amount of $15,584. It is the
result of Applicant’s illness and no medical insurance at the time. He called the hospital
to settle the account but does not have a sufficient amount to do so.
SOR 1.k is a medical debt of $332. This is also due to lack of insurance and is
not paid.
SOR 1.l is for a collection account for in the amount of $655. Applicant is
disputing this account.
SOR 1.m is for a collection account in the amount of $383 for a cell phone that
belonged to his ex-girlfriend. She was paying on it but stopped and now Applicant is
responsible for the bill. This is not paid. 
SOR 1.n is a collection account in the amount of $3,575 which Applicant believes
is “old” and is deleted from his credit report.
SOR 1.o is a collection account in the amount of $3,472 which Applicant
disputes. This is for furniture. He called the company but it no longer exists and the
account is now in collection. It is not on his credit report due to age.
4
SOR 1.p is a collection account in the amount of $3,435. Applicant is disputing
this information. He never had a credit card with the company.
SOR 1.q is a collection account in the amount of $155 for cable. Applicant has
not paid this account. 
SOR 1.r is a medical collection account in the amount of $519. It is not paid.
SOR 1.s is for a collection account in the amount of $101. Applicant has no
knowledge of it.
Applicant has contacted his creditors and is paying on small debts. His main
concern is the tax issue. He has addressed both liens. In his answer to the SOR, he
stated payment was forthcoming on six small accounts for a total of $1,957 (AE C).
Some of the accounts are as small as $100.  As noted above, one is paid and he is
making monthly payments on the tax lien. He is also paying $400 a month in child
support for his 15-year-old (Tr. 51). 
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $2,500, which includes his wife’s
salary. After monthly expenses and payment on some debt, he has no money left
(Tr.47). He is current with his car payment. Applicant paid for a 2000 vehicle that he has
in 2006 (Tr. 15).
Applicant has not received financial counseling and he does not contemplate
filing for bankruptcy.  He has no savings at this time. Although he desires to pay his
delinquent debts, he states he cannot do so until the IRS lien is paid.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
5
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19©, Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and could not meet his
financial obligations from 2001 until the present. He had tax liens. The evidence is
6
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial worries are partially the result of his relationship with his longtime
girlfriend who opened accounts in his name without his knowledge. He also had a
period of illness in 2004 after he was laid off from one job. He incurred a significant
medical bill without the benefit of medical insurance. His delinquent debts, however,
have various sources and have been ongoing. This potentially mitigating condition does
not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, his
financial problems may have been exacerbated, but Applicant did not act responsibly in
identifying and resolving his debts that preceded those events. He did not take an active
stance when he learned about many of them.  Applicant has worked steadily for many
years with a few periods of unemployment. I find this potentially mitigating condition
does not apply.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20©. This does not apply. Applicant has no budget
and has had no financial counseling. He is paying one debt (tax lien) through a
garnishment. He does not have a handle on his financial affairs. 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has paid
one tax lien and is paying on the second. He has contacted his creditors and is
promising to pay the accounts. He waited many years before attempting to resolve his
financial issues.  I conclude this potentially mitigating condition applies in part.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that some of the
alleged debts were unknown to him and were accounts opened by his ex-girlfriend. He
has not provided sufficient documentation for this assertion and he has not tried to
collect any money from her. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition does not
apply.
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2©, the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude that under the whole
person, there is not sufficient mitigation to overcome the government’s case.
Applicant has worked all his life. He supports his family and his five children. He
had some unemployment and ill health that affected his ability to pay his bills for a
number of years. He also disputes some of the accounts due to his ex-girlfriend.
Applicant promises to pay the debts when he can. He has tried to settle some of his
medical accounts but does not have a sufficient amount to do so.
Applicant has not sought financial counseling nor does he have a budget or a
plan to restructure his debt and begin repayment. Some of the debts are “old” and they
are not on his credit report and he relies on that for dispute purposes. Applicant has
about $45,000 in delinquent debt remaining. He has no ability to pay at this point in time
because he has no money left after he pays his expenses. Given the significant debt,
Applicant’s positive characteristics have not overcome the security concerns.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
8
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c- 1.s: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
