 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17679 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines B (Foreign 
Influence) and C (Foreign Preference). Eligibility for continued access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 10, 2006. On May 
30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 6, 2008; answered it on June 25, 2008; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
June 30, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 30, 2008, and 
the case was assigned to me on October 2, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
October 16, 2008, scheduling the hearing for November 4, 2008. At Applicant’s request, 
the hearing was postponed until November 13, 2008, and I convened the hearing on 
that date. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented the testimony of two 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 1 through 21, which were admitted 
without objection1. The record closed on November 4, 2008. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on November 21, 2008. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Lebanon. The request and the documents attached as enclosures were not 
admitted in evidence but are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. I took 
administrative notice as requested, with no objection by Applicant. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR with 
explanations. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old electrical engineer. He has been the president, chief 
operating officer (CEO), and facility security officer of his own company, a defense 
contractor, since June 1988 (Tr. 71). He first received a clearance in January 1985, 
while employed by a defense contractor and still a citizen of Lebanon (AX 20). His 
company has held a facility clearance since May 1989 (AX 2) and has passed every 
security inspection from that date until the date of the hearing (AX 3-13; Tr. 73). 
 
 Applicant was born in Lebanon in November 1947. He obtained a bachelor’s 
degree in civil engineering in Lebanon in 1970. He studied in France from 1972 to 1980 
at a public university affiliated with the ministry of defense, obtaining a master’s degree 
in naval architecture, and doctorates in fluid mechanics and mathematical sciences. He 
came to the U.S. in 1980, applied for permanent residence in 1982, and became a U.S. 
citizen in December 1987. In January 1985 he married a native-born U.S. citizen whom 
he met in 1973, while they were both studying in France.  
 
 When Applicant went to France to continue his education, he initially intended to 
return to Lebanon, but after the civil war in 1975, he decided to look for “another life.” 
                                                     
1 The usual convention is to letter an applicant’s exhibits. However, Applicant’s counsel submitted the 
exhibits with numbered tabs, and I chose to retain his numbering system rather than substitute letters for 
numbers. 
 
3 
 
 
The combination of meeting his U.S.-born wife and a job offer from a defense contractor 
motivated him to come to the U.S. (Tr. 65). 
 
Applicant’s spouse is an employee of the U.S. government and holds a top 
secret clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (Tr. 42). She also 
does administrative work on weekends for Applicant’s company (Tr. 41). She and 
Applicant both work with classified material in their respective jobs but they never 
discuss their work (Tr. 44-45). She testified Applicant’s brother in the U.S. worked for 
Applicant’s company until the late 1990s when they had a falling out, and they are now 
estranged and have no contact (Tr. 47-48, 78). She also testified Applicant’s family 
members know he is a scientist but they do not know he does work for the U.S. 
government (Tr. 49). 
 
 Applicant and his spouse own their home in the U.S., and their equity in the 
home is about $1.5 million. His total assets in the U.S., including his company, are 
worth about $5 million. He has no assets in Lebanon (Tr. 95).  
 
 One of Applicant’s 16 employees who has had daily contact with him testified 
that the company has protocols for handling sensitive information and enforces them 
(Tr. 32). He has never seen Applicant treat sensitive information carelessly (Tr. 33). He 
has heard Applicant mention his Lebanese family in passing, but he knows little about 
them (Tr. 34-36). 
  
 Applicant retained his Lebanese passport after becoming a U.S. citizen as a 
precaution to avoid harassment at roadside checkpoints in Lebanon, but he never found 
it necessary to use it (Tr. 84, 88, 105). When he entered and exited Lebanon, he 
showed both his U.S. and Lebanese passports, and immigration officials stamped his 
Lebanese passport (Tr. 88, 103). In October 2008, he renounced his Lebanese 
citizenship and surrendered his Lebanese passport to the Embassy of Lebanon (AX 16-
19). Although the instructions from the Lebanese embassy stated that he should give a 
reason for renouncing his Lebanese citizenship, he declined to do so because he 
believed that disclosing the reason (to retain his clearance) would be contrary to the 
interests of the U.S. (Tr. 91). As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had not yet been 
notified of Lebanon’s decision to accept his renunciations of citizenship (Tr. 120). 
 
 Applicant’s mother, two brothers, and two sisters are citizens and residents of 
Lebanon. A third brother is a citizen of Lebanon permanently residing in the U.S. 
Applicant disclosed his family members in Lebanon and his travel to visit them on his 
security clearance applications in 1984, 2004, and 2006 (GX 1; AX 20 and 21). He 
disclosed his Lebanese passport on his 2004 and 2006 applications. He was unaware 
of the security concerns raised by his passport until he received the SOR. 
 
Applicant is close to his mother and two sisters. His mother is a housewife, and 
he calls her every two or three weeks. He has been sending his mother about $15,000 a 
year for the past three or four years (GX 2 at 4; Tr. 55, 82). He sends the money by wire 
transfer to his mother’s account with a bank in Beirut (Tr. 108, 111). His mother is 
 
4 
 
 
diabetic and virtually bedridden (Tr. 50, 76). He testified he would continue his financial 
support of his mother “as long as there is nothing that forbids [him]” and “if it’s not 
illegal.” He is confident his siblings would assume responsibility for her support and care 
if he were required to stop sending her money (Tr. 81-82, 125). One of his sisters is a 
housewife whose husband works in a cement factory, and he talks to her once or twice 
a month. The other sister is a schoolteacher whose husband is a retired housing 
inspector, and he talks to her about once a month (GX 2 at 5; Tr. 56, 107). Applicant’s 
mother and two sisters live in a small, predominantly Christian town in northern 
Lebanon situated about 30 or 40 miles north of the center of terrorist activity in Beirut 
(Tr. 77-78). Applicant has visited his family in Lebanon four times in 30 years, each time 
for about a week (Tr. 83). The last visit was in July 2004 (GX 1 at 8). 
 
Applicant testified he is not close to his two brothers in Lebanon. He has 
telephonic contact about twice a year with one brother in Lebanon, an architect; and 
telephonic contact about once a year with his other brother in Lebanon, a schoolteacher 
(GX 2 at 4-5). His contact with these two brothers is limited to holiday greetings. He has 
no contact with his estranged brother who resides in the U.S. (GX 2 at 5). None of 
Applicant’s family members have any association with the Lebanese government (Tr. 
80). 
 
Applicant frequently attends international scientific conferences as well as 
classified conferences sponsored by defense agencies. He has authored numerous 
scientific articles, and several of his publications were co-authored by foreign nationals. 
They include several co-authored by employees of his company who were citizens of 
Taiwan, Korea, Russia, and India permanently residing in the U.S. (Tr. 115-16), and 
others articles co-authored by professors and students who are citizens of France (Tr. 
116). 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts about Lebanon. 
Lebanon is a parliamentary republic that became independent in November 1943. The 
U.S. policy is to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon and to help preserve its 
independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. Since its 
independence, Lebanon’s national policy has been determined by a small group of 
regional and sectarian leaders. Political institutions often play a secondary role to 
religion and personality-based politics. Lebanon has been in a state of war with Israel 
since 1973. Civil war broke out in April 1975 and did not end until 1991. Since 1992, 
Lebanon has experienced social and political instability, economic uncertainty, lack of 
infrastructure, violent clashes with Israeli forces, and political assassinations.   
 
I also take administrative notice that Lebanon’s foreign policy and internal 
policies are heavily influenced by Syria, which maintains intelligence agents in Lebanon 
and is a state sponsor of terrorism. The unstable political situation in Lebanon enables 
foreign terrorist organizations to operate within its borders. Hezbollah is the most 
prominent terrorist group in Lebanon, and it has been designated by the U.S. 
Department of State as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.” The Lebanese government 
recognizes Hezbollah as a legitimate resistance group and political party. Hezbollah 
 
5 
 
 
maintains offices in Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon, is closely allied with Iran, 
supports a variety of violent anti-Western groups, and has been involved in numerous 
anti-U.S. terrorist attacks. Hezbollah seeks to obtain U.S. technology, has been involved 
in several efforts to obtain restricted, dual-use technology, and is considered by the U.S. 
to be the most technically capable terrorist group in the world.  
 
 Finally, I take administrative notice that Lebanon has a poor human rights record 
and has been ineffective in controlling terrorism and political violence. Lebanese 
security forces have engaged in arbitrary arrest, murder, torture, and other abuses. 
There is an atmosphere of governmental corruption and lack of transparency. Militias 
and non-Lebanese forces operating outside the area of Lebanese central government 
authority have used informers and monitored telephones to obtain information about 
their perceived adversaries. Ongoing political violence and terrorism directed at 
Americans and U.S. interests make Lebanon dangerous for U.S. citizens. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s mother, two brothers, and two sisters are citizens 
and residents of Lebanon (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d), and that one of his brothers is a 
citizen of Lebanon permanently residing in the U.S. (SOR ¶ 1.c). The security concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
 
7 
 
 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 The “heightened risk” required to raise AG ¶ 7(a) is a relatively low standard. It is 
satisfied if the risk raised by the citizenship or presence of family members in a foreign 
country is greater than it would be if they were not citizens or residents of the foreign 
country. Where family ties are involved, the totality of the family ties to a foreign country 
as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003).  
 
Applicant has very limited contact with his two brothers in Lebanon. 
Nevertheless, there is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family 
member are not casual, and Applicant has not rebutted that presumption. See ISCR 
Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). Applicant’s family ties to Lebanon are 
sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), shifting the burden to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). Nevertheless, the nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to 
grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area 
where family members resided). 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
 
8 
 
 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a).  
 
 Applicant’s family members live in a Christian enclave north of Beirut, away from 
the center of Hezbollah influence. They have low-profile lives, and they do not know that 
Applicant works on defense-related projects. They have no contact with the scientific or 
high-technology community. On the other hand, Applicant’s brilliant career and 
international reputation make him a high-visibility target for direct or indirect pressure. 
While there does not appear to be a high risk of pressure being exerted on Applicant 
through his family, the evidence is insufficient to establish that it is unlikely. I conclude 
Applicant has not established AG ¶ 8(a).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s loyalty to the current government of Lebanon appears to be minimal, but his 
loyalty to his family, especially his mother, is far above “minimal.”  
 
On the other hand, Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S. He has resided in the U.S. for almost 30 years, held a clearance for 
24 years, held U.S. citizenship for 21 years, and has been married to a native-born U.S. 
citizen for 24 years. His spouse is a government employee with a high-level security 
clearance. Almost all his professional career has been in defense-related work. All his 
considerable assets are in the U.S. When he learned his dual citizenship and Lebanese 
passport raised security issues, he promptly renounced his Lebanese citizenship and 
surrendered his passport. When asked about his financial assistance to his mother, he 
indicated he would terminate it if it were forbidden or illegal. I am convinced Applicant 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is 
established. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant held a valid Lebanese passport after becoming a 
U.S. citizen (SOR ¶ 2.a). The concern under this guideline is as follows: “When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. A disqualifying condition 
may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen,” including but not limited to “possession of a current foreign 
passport.” AG ¶ 10(a)(1).  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse security 
clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 
2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual national, but 
rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country through actions.”  
ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 15, 1999). Applicant’s possession and use 
of a Lebanese passport raises AG ¶ 10(a)(1), shifting the burden to him to refute, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by if “the individual 
has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” AG ¶ 11(b). Security 
concerns based on possession or use of a foreign passport may be mitigated if “the 
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated.” AG ¶ 11(e). Applicant’s written renunciation of his Lebanese 
citizenship and delivery of that renunciation and his Lebanese passport to the Embassy 
of Lebanon establishes both of these mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He has dedicated 
much of his scientific career to supporting the national defense of the U.S. He left 
Lebanon before the civil war and decided to never return. He has lived 38 of his 61 
years in the U.S. and has held a clearance since 1985 without incident. Starting with his 
first security clearance application in 1984, he has been candid and forthright about his 
connections to Lebanon, his dual citizenship, and his possession of a Lebanese 
passport. Although previous favorable determinations do not estop the government from 
 
10 
 
 
denying an application to continue a clearance, Applicant’s history of candor, reliability, 
and trustworthiness while holding a clearance is relevant. His security profile has not 
changed since he was first granted a clearance, except to the extent that his ties to the 
U.S. have strengthened and he has renounced his Lebanese citizenship and 
surrendered his passport.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence and foreign 
preference. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
