                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-15420 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 10, 2006, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On April 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines B and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 2, 2008. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 5, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
DOHA received the request on May 5, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on June 9, 2008.  The case assignment to another administrative judge was 
made on June 10, 2008.  It was then reassigned to me on June 19, 2008 based on 
caseload considerations.  DOHA issued the original Notice of Hearing on June 25, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
2008, setting the hearing for July 16, 2008.  The case was continued to July 17th with 
Applicant’s concurrence because I was taken ill, and the case was reassigned to 
another administrative judge to hear. On said date, Applicant requested a continuance, 
and the motion was not opposed by the Government.  That part of the hearing process 
was on the record and a transcript made of it, received by DOHA on July 25, 2008.  The 
hearing was continued and the case was reassigned to me again.  A second Notice of 
Hearing was issued September 19, 2008, setting the new hearing date of October 16, 
2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 16, 2008. The Government 
offered Exhibits 1 through 8, and documents for administrative notice, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified.  He submitted Exhibits A through C, 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 22, 
2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq and Syria. (Tr. at 19-25.) The request and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as 
Administrative Notice Documents I through XIII. Applicant had no objection to these 
documents. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated May 5, 2008, Applicant admitted all the factual 
allegations in the SOR, with explanations.  He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 32 years old, married with one child, and worked in Iraq in 2006 as a 
translator for United States military forces.  He was wounded on March 21, 2006, during 
an attack while performing his duty.  He continued to serve and was evacuated in 
October 2006.  He has not returned to Iraq since then.  He works as a real estate agent 
and owns his home in the United States.  (Tr. 30, 31, 47-51, 70; Exhibits 2, A, B) 
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1993 with his family after they fled Iraq 
and the regime of the dictator Saddam Hussein.  Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 
1999.  His parents and siblings are naturalized U.S. citizens, and live in the United 
States.  He has six sisters and four brothers.  Two of his brothers are deceased. His 
father owns one-third of a house in Iraq which he inherited from his father.  Other 
relatives own the remaining interests in the house.  One of Applicant’s brothers lived in 
the house from 2004 to 2007, but it is vacant now. (Tr. 65-79, 97, 98; Exhibits 1-8, A, B) 
 
 Applicant entered a business arrangement in 2004 with certain family members, 
including a brother in Iraq, to purchase used trucks in Germany or other countries, and 
 
3 
 
 
ship them to Iraq through Syria because it has the closest port to Iraq.  Applicant 
traveled to Iraq in 2004 as part of that business operation.  Applicant’s brother planned 
to sell the trucks in Iraq.  Applicant expected to make about $30,000 on the transaction, 
but only realized about $7,000.  That brother now lives in the United States and drives a 
semi-truck. (Tr. 65-79; Exhibits 1-8, A, B) 
 
 One of Applicant’s sister’s husband worked for the U.S. Government in Iraq as a 
cultural advisor.  He resigned this past summer, and now resides in the United States.  
Another sister’s husband worked as a translator for the U.S. Government in Iraq, and he 
is now living in the United States. (Tr. 68, 69; Exhibit 2) 
 
 Applicant has a cousin who is a driver for the Iraqi oil ministry, but he has had no 
contact with him since December 2007.  Applicant listed a friend as a reference on his 
SF 86 who worked for the Iraqi Embassy in Washington, D.C., at least as of February 
2006.  Applicant has not had contact with him for two or three years. (Tr. 69-71; Exhibits 
1-8, A, B) 
 
 Applicant married his Iraqi-born wife in Syria.  The arranged marriage occurred in 
2003.  His wife is an Iraqi citizen with a “green” card.  Her mother, an Iraqi citizen, lives 
in Syria, and Applicant sent her at his wife’s request no more than $1,000 to support 
her.  He has not sent any money recently.  His wife worked in a book store in Syria for 
two or three years after fleeing Iraq.  His wife speaks with her mother and two brothers 
weekly on the telephone.  Applicant does not speak with them, and has no relationship 
with his wife’s relatives.  He has not seen her brothers since the marriage in 2003.  
They have not been to the United States.  Applicant does not know what his brothers-in-
law do for a living.  His wife went to Syria in 2006 when he went to work in Iraq. (Tr. 55-
64, 70; Exhibits 1-8) 
 
 Applicant was rated highly in the performance of his duties as a translator.  He 
was described as “quite personable” by his co-worker in 2006.  He was described as 
having expert abilities.  He liked his job and wants to return to Iraq. He held an Interim 
Secret security clearance while in Iraq and handled classified information without 
breaching security regulations.  He was recommended for two awards for his translator 
duty performance. (Tr. 30-51; Exhibit A)  
 
 In 1997, Applicant and a mechanic he employed were denied entry into Canada 
because the mechanic did not have a passport or a birth certificate.  Applicant was 21 
years old at the time.  Both men became rude and obnoxious to the Canadian border 
officials.  He had to obtain a criminal clearance letter from his home state before he 
could enter Canada again.  In 2004, while in Germany buying trucks, Applicant was on 
a subway system.  He had a ticket for travel in certain zones, but needed to travel 
beyond the zone limit.  He did not buy the additional ticket, and when confronted by the 
German ticket checker, gave a false address.  He paid the ticket and fees before he left 
Germany that year.  He has had no further trouble with law enforcement officials since 
2004. (Tr. 80-94; Exhibits 1-8) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 On a day trip to Canada to have dinner and visit a casino in the fall of 2006, 
Applicant met two women.  He later had sexual intercourse with one of these women on 
two occasions.  Applicant defended his actions by asserting this relationship was in the 
nature of a “temporary marriage” as explained in a book he offered as an exhibit.  The 
book is titled, “Temporary Marriage in Islam,” written by the director of the Islamic 
Institute of Knowledge, located in the United States.  Applicant has not seen this woman 
since his last meeting with her in 2006, and has not had further sexual relations with 
her.  His wife does not know about this relationship.  (Tr. 85-91; Exhibit C)     
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove the dictator Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. That effort was 
successful, and a new constitution was written by the Iraqi people.  After free elections, 
Iraq’s new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq 
remains plagued by violence though safer and quieter this past year than previously due 
to the American troop increases since 2007.  Violent acts are perpetrated by Al Qaeda 
terrorists and other insurgents. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have target the U.S. 
Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis.  Although the new 
government has taken aggressive action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq 
remains high, as do human rights abuses. Terrorist groups conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (Administrative Notice Documents) 
 
Syria is a Middle Eastern country with about 18 million citizens.  Syria is on the 
United States list of state sponsors of terrorism.  Since March 1963, it has been ruled by 
an authoritarian, one-party, socialist Ba’athist regime.  It provides financial and military 
support to terrorist organizations.  It ruled part of Lebanon, a neighboring country, for 
over a decade.  It was determined to be involved in the assassination of former 
Lebanese prime minister who opposed Syrian interference in Lebanese affairs.  In 
2004, the U.S. Government banned the export of Syria of products other than food and 
medicine, and prohibited Syrian aircraft from landing in the United States.  This 
executive order was later expanded.  Syria has a history of human rights abuses.  Many 
Iraqi refugees fled to Syria, and total about 1.3 million Iraqis.  There is a U.S. State 
Department travel warning about travel to and within Syria.  (Administrative Notice 
Documents)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
5 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, ”The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and  has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and two brothers-in-laws are citizens of Iraq, but are 
refugees living in Syria.  His wife also lived in Syria as a refugee with her family until 
Applicant married her and brought her to the United States.  Applicant’s family members 
(i.e., parents and siblings) live in the United States and are naturalized U.S. citizens.  
While Iraq struggles with the creation of a democracy, it continues to be routinely 
victimized by terrorist attacks. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of 
interest for Applicant.  Syria is a state sponsor of terrorism and ruled by an authoritarian 
regime. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation.  Two conditions that could mitigate the disqualifications are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interests. In 1993, he came here as a refugee and proudly became a 
naturalized citizen in 1999. He worked at various jobs since his arrival, until beginning 
his position with a federal contractor in 2006. He does not own any property in Iraq, but 
has a one-ninth interest in one-third of a house his father inherited in Iraq. That is a 
small percentage of this property.  He has a close relationship with his immediate family 
members who reside in the United States. He did not return to Iraq until 2004 on 
business, and then again in 2006, when he started his job with the U.S. forces. He was 
wounded in an attack while working as a translator with U.S. forces. His ties to the 
United States are much stronger than his ties to his wife’s family living in Syria.  
Applicant has little or no contact with his wife’s family in Syria.  He lives with his wife 
and daughter in the United States.  He is close to his wife.  She has returned to Syria to 
see her mother only once since married to Applicant in 2003.   All business contacts 
with his brother in 2004 to import trucks into Iraq occurred four years ago and the 
business does not exist anymore.  .Applicant made little money from the effort and that 
brother now lives in the United States.  His last contact with a friend at the Iraqi 
Embassy in the United States was at least two years ago.  All other contacts listed in 
the SOR are old and no longer exist in the same way as alleged in the SOR. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) has no application to Applicant’s relationships with his spouse, 
because she has a “green” card and lives in the United States with him. There is no 
likelihood that his marital relationship will create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.  It has some application to his contact with his wife’s family members in 
Syria, because he does not have contact with them.  Although there is a remote 
possibility that terrorists could attempt to coerce or threaten Applicant through his 
mother-in-law or his wife’s siblings living in Syria, it is highly unlikely.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any 
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate with 
security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security investigator for 
subject interview, completing security forms or releases, and cooperation with medical 
or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in connection with a 
personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and, 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or 
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve 
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or 
intelligence service or other group. 
 
The SOR alleged three incidents of personal misconduct under this guideline. 
Applicant was involved in two minor incidents in Canada and Germany between 1997 
and 2004.  The first involved rude behavior while trying to enter Canada with a 
mechanic he hired to work on a truck.  This behavior has not recurred.  The second was 
not buying a zone ticket for a German subway ride.  His third incident of misconduct 
involved two adulterous incidents with a woman in Canada, which he labels “temporary 
marriage” within his Muslim religion.  His wife does not know about these actions.  
These adulterous actions could affect his personal standing in the community in which 
he lives, if they became known to his family or community.  They demonstrate 
questionable judgment and untrustworthiness within his marital relationship.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased 
or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 8 (c) applies here.  The first two incidents were minor 
and occurred long ago.  They are not a factor in determining Applicant’s eligibility.  
Subsequent to them, he performed very well in Iraq as a translator.  His adultery, 
regardless of his characterization of it as “temporary marriage,” occurred immediately 
after he returned from Iraq.  It was two years ago, and was consenting conduct between 
two adults.  It has not recurred.  It is a diminished factor in evaluating Applicant’s 
security eligibility. The record evidence does not support the application of any other 
condition. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
10 
 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Four circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
human rights abuses in Iraq and Syria. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists 
are hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and 
even friendly governments, could attempt to use his mother-in-law and her sons, who 
live in Syria, to obtain such information. Second, he had connections to Iraq before he 
left there in 1993. He was born in Iraq and spent his formative years there.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. Applicant is a mature person. He came to the United States as a refugee in 
1993 and became a naturalized citizen in 1999.  He has worked in the United States 
since his arrival and currently resides with his wife and daughter.  His parents and 
siblings also came to the United States, live here, and are citizens.  He owns property in 
the United States. Out of his sense of gratitude and dedication to the United States, he 
worked with the U.S. Army, as an Arabic-speaking linguist. He takes his loyalty to the 
United States very seriously, and has worked diligently for a defense contractor in an 
important capacity for our troops.  He was wounded in combat, and after his wounds 
were treated, he kept serving as a translator with our troops.  I give great weight to the 
letters of recommendation, written by the soldiers with whom he served. They assess 
him as loyal and trustworthy, and praise his significant contributions to the cause of 
freedom in Iraq. I also was impressed by the recommendations for two awards 
Applicant received.   After leaving Iraq in 1993, he did not return for 11 years and then 
for the purpose of enjoying the new economic freedom brought there by the United 
States. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States or failed to abide by his employer’s rules and 
regulations.  
 
11 
 
 
 
Applicant held an interim security clearance during his tenure in Iraq without any 
indication that he breached security policies or procedures. While that fact is not 
normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board noted in 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s 
prior history of complying with security procedures and regulations 
significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 
5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 30, 2006). However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the nation security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. 
July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to 
an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognizes, resist, 
and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence and 
personal conduct.  I conclude the “whole person” concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a to 1.o:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a to 2.c:  For Applicant 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
