 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13029 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on July 27, 2006. On June 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, for Applicant. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 7, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 22, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on September 2, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on October 20, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 5, 
2008. The government offered Exhibits (Gov) 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and offered two documents which were 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – B and admitted without objection. The record 
 
2 
 
 
was held open until November 19, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit some additional 
documents. He timely submitted an eleven-page document which was admitted as AE 
C without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on November 12, 
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 7, 2008, Applicant admits to all of the SOR  
allegations.   
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old driver employed by a Department of Defense 
contractor seeking a security clearance.  He has worked for his current employer since 
2004. He has held a security clearance since 1998. On August 25, 1998, he was briefed 
for Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI) access on August 25, 
1998. He served on active duty in the United States Air Force from January 1998 to 
September 2002. He separated as a Senior Airman (E-4) with an Honorable discharge. 
He has an associates degree. He is married and has two sons, ages 3 ½ and 1 ½.  His 
wife is pregnant and is expected to deliver in March 2009. (Tr at 5-6, 31, 33, 46; Gov 1; 
Gov 5 at AE A.)   
 
On February 24, 1998, Applicant completed a security clearance application, SF 
86, shortly after enlisting in the United States Air Force. He answered, “No” in response 
to question “27. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity – Illegal Use of Drugs. 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used 
any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or 
prescription drugs?” He did not disclose his prior marijuana use beginning in 1995, 
crank in 1995, prescription medications that were not prescribed to him from 1995 to 
1997 and nitrous oxide in 1994/1995, and 1997. He admits that he deliberately withheld 
information about his past drug usage on the security clearance application completed 
in February 1998 because he was afraid of what would happen to him if he told the Air 
Force about his prior drug use. (Tr at 37-38.)  
 
Applicant continued to occasionally use illegal drugs during the years he served 
on active duty in the Air Force and after being granted a TS/SCI security clearance. He 
used marijuana with his childhood friends while on leave in his hometown. He used 
ecstasy in 1999. He used prescription medications that were not prescribed to him. On 
one occasion, he and another airman used nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide is not a 
controlled substance. It is a legal substance which can be purchased over the counter 
but can be abused if not used for its intended purpose. (Tr at 26, 34-35; Gov 2, section 
23(a); Gov 3; Gov 5.) 
 
On November 9, 2001, Applicant was punished under Article 15, UCMJ, for 
violating Article 134 of the UCMJ, Adultery. His punishment consisted of a reduction to 
the grade of E-3, suspended until May 2002. After that time the punishment was to be 
 
3 
 
 
remitted without further action unless sooner vacated. (Gov 4.) He was romantically 
involved with another airman who was married to another military member. She became 
pregnant. Applicant believed the child was his. They eventually lived together, married 
and divorced. At some point, Applicant discovered that he was not the father of the 
child. (Tr at 44.)  
 
After separating from active duty in September 2002, Applicant was hired by a 
defense contractor. He worked for the contractor until December 2002 when he 
accepted a job with another defense contractor. (Gov 5.) On December 17, 2002, he 
submitted a questionnaire for national security position. In “Section 23. Your Police 
Record,” he listed a June 1997 arrest for possession of alcohol by a minor and his 
November 2001 Article 15 for adultery. He answered, “Yes,” in response to “Section 
23(a) Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally 
used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, 
hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, 
depressants (barbituates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogen, or cannabis 
for your own intended profit or that of another?” He listed that he used marijuana from 
June 1996 to December 2000 approximately 30 times, he used ecstacy in July 1999; he 
used crank on one occasion in November 1995; from 1995-1996, he used various 
prescription medications such as valium, Percocet, and yellow jackets that were not 
prescribed to him on five occasions between 1995 to 1996. (Gov 2.) 
 
The SOR alleges, Applicant falsified his December 17, 2002, security clearance 
questionnaire by failing to disclose the use of prescription medications not prescribed to 
him in 1997, 1999, 2000, and 2001; and not disclosing his use of nitrous oxide in 1997, 
1998, 1999, and 2001.   
 
Applicant summarized his history of illegal drug use during subsequent interviews 
with investigators conducting his background investigation in August 2002 and January 
2003.  From 1994-1995, he used crank on one occasion, nitrous oxide on one occasion, 
and prescription muscle relaxants or anti-depressants on two to three occasions. He 
used marijuana on approximately 20 occasions from 1995 to 1996. He used marijuana 
on five to seven occasions from 1997 to September/October 2000. He used valium and 
Clonipen on approximately six occasions in 1996-1997. He used nitrous oxide on five 
occasions during 1997. He used ecstasy once in 1999. He used one Darvocet pill in 
1999. He used crank on occasion in 1994. (Gov 5.) 
 
In 2000, his mother provided him ten Percocet tablets that were prescribed to her  
when he complained of back pain. In December 2000, he and a friend each ingested 
one Percocet pill with alcohol on three occasions. He took another Percocet pill for back 
pain and lost the remaining Percocet pills. He gave a friend four of the Percocet pills. He 
ingested five Bentyl pills that were prescribed to his mother. In the January 2003 
interview, he indicated he began inhaling nitrous oxide in 1995, using it on 20 occasions 
in 1997 and once in 1998, 1999 and 2001. (Gov 5.)   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
On March 13, 2003, Applicant was found ineligible for access to NS/CSS SCI. 
The basis for the denial was his drug involvement while possessing a security clearance 
and his violation of the established NSA/CSS drug policies wherein “improper use of 
drugs is strictly prohibited.” (Gov 5 at 6.)  
 
On July 27, 2006, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).  His current job requires him to have a SECRET 
clearance. He answered, “No,” in response to Section 23(e) which asks, “In the last 7 
years, have you been subject to court martial or other disciplinary proceedings under 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice? (include non-judicial, Captain’s mast, etc.)” He did 
not list the Article 15 nonjudicial punishment he received in November 2001.  Applicant 
states that he was told that he was issued a conditional Article 15 that would be 
removed from his record after six months. He received a suspended reduction in grade 
that could be vacated over a six month period if he committed further misconduct. He 
listed the Article 15 nonjudicial punishment on his previous security clearance 
application dated December 17, 2002. (Tr at 28-29, 45-46; Gov 1; Gov 2; Gov 4.)  
 
Applicant answered “No” in response to Section 26(b) on the July 27, 2006 e-QIP 
application. The question asks, “To your knowledge, have you ever had a clearance or 
access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked, or have you ever been debarred 
from government employment? (An administrative downgrade or termination of a 
security clearance is not a revocation.)” He did not list that his access to SCI was 
denied on March 13, 2003. (Gov 1; Gov 5.)  
 
Applicant answered “Yes” in response to Section 24(a) on the July 27, 2006 e-
QIP application. The question asks, “Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, 
whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, 
marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, 
heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbituates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?”  He listed his use of 
marijuana once in July 2000. He did not list his marijuana use from 1999 to 2000, or his 
use of prescription medication without a prescription in 1999, 2000, and 2001. (Gov 1.)  
 
On February 17, 2007, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator pertaining to 
his security clearance background investigation. The purpose of the interview was his 
failure to list his denial of SCI access in March 2003. He indicated that he did not 
intentionally falsify any documentation.  He stated he did not list the denial of SCI 
access in March 2003 because he was not aware that his access was denied. He said 
that when he was hired by his current employer in 2004, he was told that his clearance 
was still active. He admitted using marijuana 4 - 5 times from 1998 to July 2000. He has 
not used marijuana since July 2000. He also used prescription pain killers that were not 
prescribed to him on 3 - 4 occasions over that same period. (Gov 3.)  
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that he did not list that he was denied 
access to SCI on July 27, 2006, security clearance questionnaire because he was trying 
to hide from it.  He thought that since his clearance was still active over the past four 
 
5 
 
 
years that his denial of his SCI access “somehow maybe it got swept under the table. 
Maybe it was never really adjudicated, but just basically, I was dishonest and did not 
admit to it. You know, I have a family, and I was scared to death. I didn’t know – you 
know, I just wasn’t forthright and honest about it.” (Tr. at 39-41.) He admits that he knew 
his SCI access was denied and that he should have listed it on the security clearance 
questionnaire.  He admits that he initially tried to “dodge” the issue of his denial of SCI 
access during the February 2007 interview with the investigator conducting his 
background investigation by claiming that he was not aware that he was technically 
denied the security clearance. (Tr at 42-43.)  
 
Regarding his failure to fully disclose the extent of his drug use on his security 
clearance applications dated December 17, 2002, and July 27, 2006, Applicant admits 
that he did not provide the full extent of his drug use. He thought that he was to cover 
drug use that occurred within the past seven years or just did not remember the full 
extent of his illegal drug use. His failure to disclose the full extent of his drug use was 
not intentional. (Tr at 22 - 23, 36-39; Gov 3; Answer to SOR.) 
 
If Applicant completes future security clearance applications, he intends to 
answer every question in its entirety and to be as truthful as possible. He no longer 
associates with his former friends who used illegal drugs. He married in 2004. He is a 
family man who works full-time and takes college courses. His father-in-law is a pastor. 
He and his wife are active in the church. (Tr at 31-33, 46.)   
 
The Chief Information Officer of Applicant’s employer wrote a letter on his behalf. 
He states that “the very nature of [Applicant’s] position requires a commitment of 
integrity and much responsibility due to the investment of training and multitude of 
requirements that is required for this position.” He notes that Applicant has “maintained 
reliability, flexibility with scheduling, dependability, and a solid commitment in his 
position.”  He has worked for the company for over four years without a single infraction. 
His work and work ethic has been exemplary.  He has been rewarded with bonus 
acknowledgments and numerous raises because of his contributions. (AE C at 2-3.)  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law, who is also the pastor of his church, wrote that 
Applicant has been a member of the church for four years. He is an active participant. 
He is involved in weekly bible study, the choir, and works in the children’s ministry. He 
also serves as an usher and is on the committee for campus maintenance and building 
improvements. He has known Applicant for over 20 years.  He knows he was an 
excellent student and athlete. He is married to his oldest daughter. He describes 
Applicant as “conscientious and a hard worker” and “responsible and dependable.” He 
is studying to complete a bachelor of science degree. (AE C at 4.) 
 
Applicant’s wife states that she and Applicant have been married for four years. 
He is a wonderful father who is very devoted to his children.  He is trying to improve his 
life by completing his education. He has about a year and half left to complete his 
bachelor’s degree. They are active in their church. She requests that her husband not 
be evaluated by the poor choices he made as a young teenager/adult but by the man he 
 
6 
 
 
is today. (AE C at 7.) Two other members of Applicant’s church wrote letters stating 
favorable attributes. (AE C at 5-10.) During his military service, he received numerous 
letters of appreciation for his service. (AE A; AE B.)    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
7 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The Personal Conduct guideline lists several specific disqualifying conditions.  
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) potentially applies with 
respect to Applicant’s failure to disclose the full extent of his illegal drug use on his 
security clearance questionnaires dated February 24, 1998, December 17, 2002, and 
July 27, 2006.  
 
 Applicant’s omission of illegal drug use on his February 24, 1998, security 
clearance questionnaire was deliberate. He admits that he deliberately withheld all 
information about his prior drug use because he was concerned about what action the 
Air Force would take if he disclosed it. He was on active duty at the time and apparently 
aware of the Air Force policy against illegal drug use. 
 
 Although Applicant did not disclose the full extent of his illegal drug use on his 
December 17, 2002 and July 27, 2006, security clearance applications, his omissions 
were not material. On both applications, Applicant disclosed that he used illegal drugs. 
On the December 2002 security clearance application, he listed marijuana use from 
1996 to December 2000, ecstasy in 1999, crank in 1995 and prescription medications 
without a prescription from 1995 -1996.  Subsequent interviews revealed that Applicant 
used prescription medications on various occasions from 1997-2001 and nitrous oxide 
from 1997 to 2001. His omission of the prescription drug use from 1997 – 2001 appears 
to be the result of a faulty memory as opposed to a deliberate intent to deceive. Nitrous 
oxide is not a controlled substance. Applicant was not required to list this in response to 
the drug use question on either application because the question asks about controlled 
substances.  Applicant only disclosed a one-time marijuana use on his July 27, 2006 
security clearance questionnaire. He thought he had to disclose illegal drug use in the 
 
8 
 
 
past 7 years. While his math may have been questionable calculating the seven year 
period (the seven year period would go back to 1999), his omission was not material 
considering his prior disclosures of his drug abuse history. I find SOR ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.e for 
Applicant.    
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(a) potentially applies pertaining to Applicant’s failure to disclose his 
November 2001 Article 15 nonjudicial punishment in response to section 23(e) on his 
July 27, 2006 security clearance questionnaire. I find Applicant’s omission was not 
intentional or material. Applicant thought that he did not have to list the Article 15 
because he was told that it was a conditional Article 15 that would be removed from his 
records after six months. While this is not accurate, it is plausible to assume that 
Applicant misunderstood the advice given pertaining to his Article 15 since he is not well 
versed in military justice issues. (His punishment was remitted after six months not the 
Article 15.) Regardless, Applicant listed the Article 15 on his previous security clearance 
questionnaire in December 2002. I do not find the omission to be material because he 
previously put the government on notice in his previous security clearance 
questionnaire. SOR ¶ 1.d is found for Applicant.  
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(a) applies pertaining to Applicant’s failure to disclose that his SCI 
access was suspended in March 2003 in response to section 26(b) on his July 27, 
2006, security clearance application. He admits that he intentionally answered “No” to 
this question. He also admits to telling the investigator during his February 12, 2007, 
background investigation interview that he was never informed that his SCI access was 
denied. He admitted at hearing that he was aware that his SCI access was denied and 
that he should have listed it on his security clearance questionnaire.  He deliberately 
omitted this information in hopes that it had been “swept under the table.”  
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, 
or other official government representative) potentially applies with respect to SOR ¶ 1.a 
which alleges Applicant falsified material facts during a February 12, 2007 background 
investigation interview by not disclosing the full history of his drug use.  Applicant 
thought that they were discussing illegal drug use that occurred within the past seven 
years. The record contains no information as to what the investigator specifically asked 
Applicant during the interview. I find Applicant’s failure to disclose the full extent of his 
history of illegal drug use was not with the intent to deceive. He previously disclosed his 
illegal drug use in previous interviews and security clearance questionnaires. I find for 
Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 1.a. 
  
 PC DC 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient under any other single guideline, but which when considered as a 
whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information) applies with respect to Applicant’s illegal drug use 
while on active duty and while possessing a TS/SCI security clearance. While Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
has not used illegal drugs in over seven years, his conduct raises questions about his 
judgment, trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 PC DC 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing) applies to Applicant’s case. Applicant lied about his illegal drug 
use on his 1998 security clearance application because he was concerned what action 
the Air Force would take if they were aware of his drug use. Despite these concerns, he 
continued to use illegal drugs while on active duty and while having a valid security 
clearance and access to SCI. His past conduct led to the denial of his SCI access which 
he lied about on his most recent security clearance questionnaire. His lies and his past 
illegal drug use made him vulnerable to exploitation or manipulation.  
 
 I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 1.g which alleges that he was denied 
SCI access by another governmental agency in March 2003.  This allegation essentially 
pleads a fact. The underlying conduct which is the basis for the denial of SCI access is 
sufficiently addressed in other SOR allegations.   
 
 The government established a prima facie case for SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, and 1.h.  The 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the security concerns. (Directive ¶ E3.1.15.) The Directive lists several mitigating 
conditions under personal conduct. The following Personal Conduct Mitigating 
Conditions (PC MC) potentially apply: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not 
apply because Applicant did not promptly disclose the omission of his prior drug use on 
his 1998 security clearance questionnaire until after he separated from active duty. His 
subsequent disclosure was not prompt. He also did not promptly disclose his deliberate 
omission of his March 2003 denial of SCI access on his July 27, 2006, security 
clearance questionnaire in response to section 26(b). He admits to dodging the issue 
further during his February 12, 2007, interview with the investigator conducting his 
background investigation.     
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) does not apply.  While Applicant is given credit for admitting to his 
deliberate falsifications during the hearing, questions remain about his trustworthiness 
and judgment due to his history of violating the trust placed in him when given a security 
clearance and SCI access. He lied about his drug use on his 1998 security clearance 
application, knowing that the Air Force could potentially take action against him if they 
were aware of the illegal drug use. He continued to use illegal drugs while on active 
duty in the military and while possessing a TS/SCI security clearance. To his credit, 
Applicant fully disclosed his illegal drug use on his 2002 security clearance 
 
10 
 
 
questionnaire which resulted in the denial of his SCI access in March 2003. But he lied 
about the denial of his SCI access on his most recent security clearance questionnaire 
and during a February 12, 2007 background investigation interview. While Applicant 
appeared to be straight forward during the hearing, he has a pattern of deception that 
goes back more than ten years. Questions remain about his trustworthiness and good 
judgment.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) applies. At hearing, Applicant 
admitted to his deliberate omission of his drug use on his 1998 security clearance 
questionnaire and his deliberate omission that he was denied SCI access on his July 
27, 2006, security clearance application.  He provided full disclosure about his past 
illegal drug use. He has taken positive steps to reduce vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress. However, Applicant’s full disclosure during the hearing does not 
outweigh his history of deception pertaining to his illegal drug use and his deliberate 
falsifications on his 1998 and 2006 security clearance questionnaires.    
 
 None of the other PC MCs are relevant to the facts of Applicant’s case. He has 
not mitigated the concerns raised under personal conduct.  
   
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply with respect to 
Applicant’s deliberate omissions on his February 24, 1998, security clearance 
questionnaire (SOR ¶ 1.f) and his deliberate omission on his July 27, 2006 security 
clearance questionnaire (SOR ¶ 1.c.) His falsification of his security clearance 
application violates Title 18, United States Code, § 1001, a felony.  
 
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not 
apply with respect to Applicant’s deliberate falsifications due to his history of providing 
false information on his security clearance applications. The government expects 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant’s to be truthful at all times when completing their security clearance 
applications. Applicant intentionally provided false information on his first security 
clearance application on February 24, 1998. He intentionally provided false information 
on his most recent security clearance questionnaire on July 27, 2006. While he 
acknowledged his behavior at hearing, not enough time has elapsed to mitigate the 
concerns raised due to his lack of truthfulness on his security clearance questionnaires.  
 
CC MC ¶ 33(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) applies. Applicant expressed remorse about his past 
falsifications during the hearing. He is married, has two children with another child on 
the way. He attends college and volunteers with his church.  
 
Applicant’s acceptance of responsibility at hearing is the first step towards 
rehabilitation.  The criminal conduct concerns are mitigated. 
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
documents received while on active duty in the Air Force. I considered his honorable 
discharge from the Air Force, however, had the Air Force discovered his illegal drug use 
while he was on active duty, it is not very likely his service characterization would be 
honorable. I considered the favorable comments by his superior at work as well as his 
wife, father-in-law and fellow church members. While he should be given credit for 
accepting responsibility at hearing for his past deliberate falsifications, he initially misled 
the government by omitting his denial of SCI access on his most recent security 
clearance questionnaire and during a background investigation in February 2007. While 
Applicant appears to have matured, his recent admissions are not sufficient to 
overcome the concerns raised by his deliberate falsifications during his most recent 
background investigation and considering his past history of untrustworthy behavior. 
 
12 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2. Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
