 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15226 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Criminal Conduct and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On June 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 9, 2008, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the government’s written case on July 23, 2008. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on August 21, 2008. As of October 21, 2008, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on October 21, 
2008, and reassigned to me on December 15, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 11, which purports to be a certified result of 
interview. It includes a signed affidavit from Applicant dated February 15, 2008, stating 
“that the information [he] provided to an investigator in May 21, 2007 is true and 
correct.” Attached are Office of Personnel Management (OPM) reports of investigation 
(ROI). An ROI stated that a personal subject interview (PSI) was conducted on 
February 15, 2008, to obtain a signed affidavit. The PSI of May 21, 2007 was not 
included in GE 11. There were additional ROIs about information apparently obtained 
by the OPM investigator. The only item that Applicant certified as true was the 
information provided to the OPM investigator on May 21, 2007, and that information was 
not included in GE 11. The other information in GE 11 is inadmissible without an 
authenticating witness under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Additional Procedural Guidance. Since 
there is nothing admissible contained in GE 11, it will not be admitted or considered.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2006. He is a high school graduate. He was 
married in 1991 and divorced in 1993. He has two children, ages 16 and 12.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 1990, and charged with possession of stolen 
property. He pled guilty and was sentenced to a fine, 30 days confinement, with 4 days 
converted to community service, and 12 months probation. Applicant indicated that he 
was in a friend’s car, which had a stolen stereo installed in it, when the car was stopped 
by the police.2   
 
 Applicant was cited in January 1994 for public nuisance. He and a friend were 
playing loud music on a portable stereo at about 4:30 am in the parking lot next to a 
high school football field. He and the friend were exercising on the field and did not 
realize the music would carry as far as it did. He was found guilty of the infraction, fined, 
and given a 10-day suspended sentence.3   
 
 Applicant let two girls drive his car in September 2001. The car was involved in 
an accident when they hit a mail box and the car ended up in a ditch. The girls left the 
scene of the accident. Applicant came back and removed the car from the ditch and left. 
                                                          
1 GE 9. 
 
2 GE 3, 4, 10. 
 
3 GE 3, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
When he was contacted by the police he provided them false information and stated 
that he was the driver of the vehicle. He was arrested and charged with obstruction of 
law enforcement. He was convicted, fined, and sentenced to 365 days in jail, with 364 
days suspended.4   
 
 An Order for Protection was issued against Applicant on June 30, 2003, ordering 
him to have no contact with an ex-girlfriend except by U.S. mail, and to remain 500 feet 
from her residence and place of employment. He was investigated in August 2003, for 
violating the Order of Protection. He admitted to the police officer that he left a vulgar 
note on her windshield and that he went to see her at her new boyfriend’s house. He 
was charged on September 3, 2003, with criminal trespass which occurred in May 2003, 
prior to the issuance of the Order of Protection. Prosecution was deferred for two years 
pending payment of a fine and completion of a mental health evaluation and an alcohol 
evaluation. Applicant completed the terms of the deferred adjudication and the charge 
was dismissed in December 2005.5  
 
 Applicant was arrested in June 2006, and charged with rape of a child, third 
degree. He pled guilty in August 2006, to communicating with a child for immoral 
purposes. He was sentenced to a fine, 365 days confinement with 363 days suspended 
for two years, two years probation, and he was ordered to register as a sexual offender. 
Applicant indicated that a neighbor wanted to drive his car. She told him that her friend 
wanted to have sex with him. He let the neighbor drive the car. He stated that he 
thought the age of consent was 16, and both girls told him that the friend was 16 years 
old. He also stated that “the girl lied about her age.” The age of the girl is not in 
evidence, but she must have been under 16 years old.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
                                                          
4 GE 3, 6. 
 
5 GE 3, 7, 8. 
 
6 GE 3, 4, 9, 10. 
 
 
4 
 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s arrests and convictions raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c) as disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a)-(d) are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s most recent conviction is the most serious. He was on probation for 
two years, which at best, just ended a few months ago. He is a registered sexual 
offender. Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to raise any mitigating condition. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
6 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 An Order for Protection was issued against Applicant, ordering him to have no 
contact with an ex-girlfriend. I do not find that the issuance of the Order of Protection 
independently raises any disqualifying condition. SOR ¶ 2.a is found for Applicant. 
There is evidence that Applicant on at least two occasions violated the Order of 
Protection. Those illegal actions are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 16(c) and (e) as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
7 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant violated the Order of Protection in 2003. He was convicted in 2006, of 
communicating with a child for immoral purposes. None of the mitigating conditions are 
applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a lengthy history of 
criminal acts. He is a registered sexual offender arising from a 2006 conviction. His 
explanation for the 2006 act is that he mistakenly thought the girl was 16 years old.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Criminal Conduct and Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
