                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12008 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on April 2, 2007.  On March 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
Applicant for personal conduct and criminal conduct under Guidelines E and J.  The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 2, 2008. 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 30, 2008.  He admitted one and 
denied three allegations under Guidelines E with explanations.  He admitted seven and 
denied three of the allegations under Guideline J with explanations.  He requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on October 27, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on October 28, 2008.  DOHA 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 2008, for a hearing on November 19, 2008.  
I convened the hearing as scheduled.  The government offered six government exhibits, 
marked (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 6.  Applicant objected to Government Exhibits 5 and 6, 
reports of personal conduct and criminal incidents, as not being relevant to his security 
worthiness since the incidents happened long ago and he has matured.  The objection 
was overruled and all government exhibits were received and admitted to the record 
(Transcript 17-21).  Applicant submitted three Applicant Exhibits, marked (App. Ex.) A-
C, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on his behalf.  DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing on December 2, 2008.  Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel did not proceed with presentation of information for SOR 
allegation 1.c for lack of evidence.  SOR 1.c alleges a falsification of a Questionnaire for 
National Security Position signed by Applicant on April 30, 1996.  The document is not 
readable and Applicant's answers on the form cannot be determined.  Department 
Counsel also did not proceed on the criminal conduct allegation of falsification of this 
Questionnaire in SOR 2.b.  Findings for Applicant are entered for these two allegations.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old server administrator for a defense contractor.  He 
received a degree in computer science in 2003 and has worked for the defense 
contractor for approximately 18 months.  Applicant was in the Navy for three years from 
June 1996 until August 1999 as an automatic data processor.  He was denied a security 
clearance while on active duty.  Applicant tried to learn why he was denied a clearance 
but his request for information did not produce an investigative file.  Applicant believes 
his clearance was denied based upon information provided by his associates in the 
community and church that he is introverted and anti-social.  The reason for the denial 
is not contained Applicant's file (Tr. 42-47; App. Ex. A, NCIS Letter, dated January 3, 
2008; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated April 2, 2007; Gov. Ex. 2, Answer to Interrogatory, dated 
January7, 2008 at 4). 
 
Applicant admitted that he was charged with inappropriate sexual activity with his 
younger siblings when he was fifteen years old.  He admitted he was placed in a youth 
offender program and received some counseling (Tr. 26-32; SOR 1.a).  Applicant 
denied that he deliberately failed to list the charge on his enlistment papers for the Navy 
(SOR 1.b).  He also denied that he deliberately failed to list an arrest for assault and 
battery on his April 2007 security clearance application (SOR 1.d).  Applicant also 
denied criminal conduct arising from the falsification (SOR 2.a and 2.c).  Applicant 
admitted to being arrested and charged with five driving offenses (SOR 2.d, 2.f, 2.h, 2.i., 
and 2.j), and two arrests and charges for assault and battery (SOR 2.e and 2.g). 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant's parents divorced and he and his younger siblings lived with his father 
for about a year in 1992-1993, and then his mother for about a year in 1993-1994.  He 
admitted that during this time when he was approximately fifteen years old he had 
inappropriate sexual contact with his six year old sister and younger brother a number 
of times over the period of a few months.  His mother caught him and his sister having 
the inappropriate sexual contact and notified the police.  Applicant was placed in a 
youth offender home and he was required to attend counseling.  His parents took him 
out of the youth offender home and program after a few months for reasons he does not 
know.  The counseling was discontinued at the halfway house when he left the group 
home.  He did receive counseling intermittently from the time he left the halfway house 
until the time he entered the Navy.  He has continued to voluntarily receive counseling 
for social issues since then.  He considers such counseling to be more of a check and 
sounding board for him.  He has not been involved in any inappropriate sexual activity 
since this incident (Tr. 32-34, 47-53, 53-56; Gov. Ex. 5, Applicant's Statement, dated 
December 13, 1996 at 3). 
 
Applicant entered active Navy duty in June 1996 after completing high school.  
When he was completing his paperwork to join the Navy, he discussed the juvenile 
sexual charges with the recruiter and was advised that he did not have to include it on 
his application since the incident was a sealed juvenile issue.  Applicant was advised by 
the security specialist at boot camp, to include the offense on his security clearance 
application.  Applicant completed a full statement and disclosure of his prior residences, 
education, employment, criminal conduct, counseling, and alcohol and drug use (Tr. 35, 
56-57; Gov. Ex. 5, Statement, dated December 13, 1995). 
 
Applicant admitted he was charged with driving on a suspended operator's 
license on January 3, 1999 (SOR 1.j).  He was fined and paid court costs.  Applicant 
was charged with reckless driving on August 11, 1999 (SOR 1.f).  He was fined and 
paid court costs.  Applicant was charged with driving on a suspended license on 
October 21, 1999 (SOR 1.i).  He was fined and paid court costs.  He was again arrested 
and charged with driving with a suspended license on November 5, 1999 (SOR 1.h).  
He was sentenced to a suspended jail term of ten days and fined and paid court costs 
(See Gov. Ex. 4, Court Information, dated March 25, 2008 at 1-5).   
 
Applicant had no other driving offenses until January 21, 2007 when he was 
charged with driving on a suspended license.  Applicant had not timely paid his vehicle 
personal property tax.  His license was suspended by motor vehicle authorities on 
January 19, 2007.  However, the notice of suspension was not mailed to Applicant until 
January 23, 2007, two days after he was charged with driving on his suspended license.  
Since he had not been notified at the time of his arrest that his license was suspended, 
the case was dismissed (Tr. 58-59; Gov. Ex. 4, Court Information, dated March 25, 
2008, at 6). 
 
Applicant lived with and had a child with another sailor when he was in the Navy.  
They were on different deployment schedules.  Applicant was discharged from the Navy 
so he could care for the child (App. Ex. C, DD 214, Discharge for Parenthood, dated 
 
4 
 
 
August 17, 1999).  The female sailor returned from a cruise with another sailor as her 
boyfriend.  Applicant and the girlfriend continued to live together for a time since neither 
could afford to move out.  However, the situation became difficult and the female sailor 
charged him with assault and battery to force Applicant to move.  The charges were 
dismissed (Tr. 61-64; Gov. Ex. 3, Federal Bureau of Investigation Criminal Justice 
Report; Gov. Ex. 4, Court Information, dated March 25, 2008, at 9).   
 
Applicant was married in December 2002 to "S".  The marriage was difficult and 
Applicant and "S" fought often.  At one time, "S" threw an ashtray at him shattering it 
against the wall.  Applicant grabbed her arm to stop her from trying to hit him.  "S" 
talked to a friend who informed her that she should file charges for assault against 
Applicant since he grabbed her arm.  "S" filed the charges.  About a week later, "S" 
decided she did not want to press charges.  However, Applicant had to attend a court 
session where the charges were not prosecuted.  Applicant and "S" separated in April 
2003 and their divorce was final on October 9, 2008.  Applicant did not include the 
arrest and charges for assault and battery on his e-QIP because he had forgotten about 
the offense since it was not prosecuted.  He had checked court record in one jurisdiction 
for the above traffic and other assault and battery offense.  This assault and battery 
offense was in another jurisdiction so it did not come up on his search (Tr. 65-69; Gov. 
Ex. 4, Court Information, dated March 25, 2008, at 7-8). 
 
Applicant's immediate supervisor stated that Applicant has been a true 
professional in all aspects of his job.  He is an integral part of their team and is one of 
their valuable leaders.  He has no reason to doubt Applicant's loyalty, trustworthiness, 
dependability, and judgment.  He believes Applicant should be granted a position of 
trust (App. Ex. B, Letter, dated November 14, 2008). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
5 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  There are two issues of Applicant's personal conduct that raise 
security concerns, his inappropriate sexual actions with his younger siblings in 1993, 
and his failure to report the incident on his Navy enlistment application as well as his 
failure to report an assault and battery on his April 2007 security clearance application.  
Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance 
process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks the 
central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence the person can be 
entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.   
 
Applicant's inappropriate sexual contact with his young siblings that caused him 
to be charged with criminal conduct and being placed in a youth offender program 
raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16 (e) (personal 
conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if 
known, may affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing . . .).  
 
6 
 
 
This personal conduct by Applicant could affect his professional, personal, or 
community standing and make him vulnerable to exploitation or manipulation. 
 
 In regard to the his conduct of inappropriate sexual incidents with his younger 
siblings in 1993 when he was fifteen years old, Applicant raises Personal Conduct 
Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) AG ¶ 17(c) "the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment"; PC MC AG ¶ 17(d) "the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior, or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur"; and PC MC AG ¶ 17(e) "the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress."  The incidents are 
certainly not minor.  Inappropriate sexual conduct with his younger siblings is serious 
and grave.  At the time of the incidents, Applicant was fifteen years old and his family 
was involved in difficult times caused by the divorce of the mother and father and the 
children being shuffled between the parents.  Applicant was sent to a halfway house 
and received some type of counseling.  He was withdrawn from the halfway house and 
counseling by his parents for unknown reasons.  He and his siblings are on good terms 
which show the incidents did not adversely affect them.  He has continued to seek 
counseling not necessarily for this incident but for managing everyday social issues.  
Applicant is now 30 years old and has a child of his own.  He completed college and is 
employed.  His supervisor notes that he is an excellent worker.  While there is no bright 
line rule as to how much time must pass and the extent of positive steps that must be 
taken to mitigate such an offense, it is clear that a person must show reasonableness, 
prudence, and honesty in their dealings with people, and adherence to a social sense of 
duty and obligation.  Applicant over the fifteen years since the incidents with his siblings 
has taken positive steps towards rehabilitation.   While there may be incidents of traffic 
offenses and relationship issues with a girlfriend and a spouse, he has not had any 
incidents that raise to the level of inappropriate contact with minors.  Applicant provided 
sufficient information to mitigate this personal conduct. 
 
The security clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and 
accurate information.  If a person conceals or provides false information, the security 
clearance process cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified 
information is in the best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant’s failure 
to report the above incident on his Navy enlistment papers and his failure to report a 
2003 assault and battery arrest and charge on his 2007 security clearance application 
raise security concerns under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 
16(a) "the deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, to determine security eligibility or trustworthiness"; and PC DC 
AG ¶ 16(b) "deliberately providing false and misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative". 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant twice did not provide full and complete information on documents 
submitted to government authorities, his Navy enlistment papers and his April 2007 
security clearance application,  In regard to these failures, Applicant raised by his 
testimony PC MC AG ¶ 17(a) "the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct 
the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; PC 
MC AG ¶ 17(b) "the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or in adequate advice of authorized 
personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically concerning 
the security clearance process.  Upon being made aware of the requirement to 
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully"; and 
PC MC AG ¶ 17(c) "the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment". 
 
 Appellant denied intentional falsification.  Applicant informed the recruiter of the 
incident involving his siblings.  He was advised that he did not have to include the 
information on his enlistment papers since it was a juvenile offense and the records 
were sealed.  When he was advised by security personnel during boot camp that the 
instruction received from the recruiter was not correct, he provided full and complete 
information concerning the incident as well as other actions (See, Gov. Ex. 5, 
Applicant's Statement, dated December 13, 1996).  As for the failure to list the assault 
and battery on his April 2007 security clearance application, Applicant had forgotten 
about the incident since it was dismissed.  He checked the court records in one district 
for his offense and he listed the traffic offenses from that district on his application.  He 
did not check the records of a nearby district where the assault and battery was 
adjudicated and dismissed.  While there is a security concern for an omission, 
concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement 
to the government when applying for a security clearance, every omission, 
concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a falsification.  A falsification must be 
deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully.  Applicant did 
not report the inappropriate sexual incident on his Navy enlistment papers because of 
improper advice.  He did not include the assault and battery because he did not 
remember the incident since it was dismissed.  Applicant did not deliberately fail to 
report the incidents to government official with intent to deceive.  Applicant has 
mitigated security concerns for his personal conduct.   
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 30)  The SOR alleges that Applicant 
violated federal law by knowingly and willfully providing false information on his Navy 
enlistment papers and his April 2007 security clearance application (18 U.S.C. § 1001).  
Since I have found that Applicant did not deliberately provide false information on either 
 
8 
 
 
document, I find for Applicant on these two criminal conduct allegations concerning 
falsification. 
 
Applicant's arrest and charges for the inappropriate sexual conduct with his 
younger siblings, the five arrests and charges for traffic offenses, and the two arrests 
and charges for assault and battery raise Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions 
(CC DC) AG ¶ 31 (a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), and CD DC 
AG ¶ 31 (c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted).  These incidents raise 
security concerns even though the two assault and batteries were dismissed or not 
prosecuted, and the five other incidents are basically traffic offenses. 
 
 Appellant has raised by his testimony Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions 
(CC MC) AG ¶ 32(a) "so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment"; CC MC 
AG ¶ 32(b) "the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life"; CC MC AG ¶ 32 (c) "evidence that 
the person did not commit the offense"; and CC MC AG ¶ 32(d) "there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse, or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement."  As noted under the 
personal conduct security concern, the inappropriate sexual conduct in 1993 happened 
over fifteen years ago when the circumstances of the family were unusual.  Applicant 
presented sufficient information to show he has been rehabilitated.  The two assault and 
battery charges were based on allegations from his then girlfriend and his former wife.  
The circumstances of both incidents show that Applicant was involved in mutual 
assaultive conduct with his alleged victim.  The decision not to prosecute or the 
dismissal of the charges together with how the incidents happened is sufficient to 
conclude that Applicant's conduct did not amount to a criminal offense of assault and 
battery.  The traffic incidents happened mostly in the 1999 to 2001 timeframe.  These 
incidents were minor and sufficient time has passed that they do not cast doubt on 
Applicant's reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment.  The incident in 2007 seems to 
be more a mistake of timing since Applicant was not notified that his license was 
temporarily suspended until after he was cited by police.  Based on all of the information 
presented as to criminal conduct, I find that Applicant has provided sufficient information 
to mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered Applicant's three years 
on active duty in the Navy.  Applicant's security clearance denial while in the Navy 
appears to be a proper action based on the circumstances at the time.  However, the 
circumstances have changed and Applicant's conduct and circumstances must be 
examined to determine if he is now reliable, trustworthy, and displays good judgment,  I 
considered that Applicant completed college after the Navy and is gainfully employed by 
a defense contractor.  His conduct with his siblings is serious and reprehensible.  But it 
happened when he was a juvenile under some unusual family circumstances.  He 
received counseling and more than fifteen years has expired with no further incidents.  
He did not deliberately provide false information on documents for the government with 
intent to deceive.  The two assault and battery charges were either not prosecuted or 
dismissed and happened under the unusual circumstances of his relationship with his 
girlfriend and his wife.  The incidents do not now adversely affect his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  Most of the traffic offenses happened over seven 
years ago and they also do not now reflect on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  Applicant has established that these criminal and personal conduct incidents 
are unlikely to recur.  Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising 
from his personal and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.j:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
