                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17025 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen E. Voelker, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used illegal drugs between 1999 and August 2005, the majority of 
which occurred while he was a college student. He has stopped three years ago and will 
not use in the future as illegal drug use is inconsistent with this future plans. Applicant 
has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under drug involvement. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 6, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under drug involvement.  
 
 On July 7, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
September 3, 2008, I was assigned the case. On October 7, 2008, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on October 28, 2008. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant and 
one witness testified on his behalf and submitted Exhibits A through M, which were 
admitted into evidence. On November 6, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegations 
in SOR ¶ 1.h. He admitted the remaining allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old senior consultant (Tr. 46) who has worked for a 
defense contractor since 2006, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant 
is a valuable team member, very intelligent, quick to identify problems, trustworthy, 
honest, a flexible and adaptive team member. He has been recognized for his 
knowledge and his strong analysis. (Exs. A, B, D, G, H) Applicant has received 
certificates of appreciation for his outstanding performance. (Tr. 48, Exs. C and D) He is 
actively pursuing an MBA, attending classes twice a week. (Tr. 19, 51, Ex E) 
 
 From August 1999 until December 2003, Applicant was in college. From June 
1999 until December 2002, Applicant used marijuana 25 to 30 times. He first used it 
after high school graduation and then during his sophomore and junior years in college. 
(Tr. 68-69) In 2002, he stopped using marijuana because it made him feel ill. (Tr. 68, 
70)  
 
In February 2001, while a junior in college, Applicant underwent surgery for a 
shoulder injury; a torn ligament. (Tr. 62-63) He was prescribed hydrocodone for the 
pain. From April 2002 to March 2005, he used hydrocodone 15 to 20 times in a 
recreational, unauthorized manner. He would take a pill with a couple of beers, which 
gave a relaxed, jovial, and mellow effect. He thought the combination of the drug and 
alcohol would amplify the alcohol’s effect. (Tr. 94) In late 2002 or early 2003, Applicant 
sold the remainder of his prescription, approximately ten pills, to a friend for $20. (Tr. 
64-65, Ex. 4)  
 
Two years ago he was offered hydrocodone. He informed the individual he was 
not interested in using it or being around it. He then left the area. (Tr. 89) Applicant does 
not associate with the individual who bought the hydrocodone, nor does he associate 
with individuals using illegal drugs. (Tr. 76, Ex. 3) Drug use is inconsistent with his 
current life goals. (Tr. 90)  
 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
From March 2001 to September 2003, Applicant used Ritalin 15 times in an 
unauthorized manner. College friends had prescriptions for Ritalin. Before attending 
fraternity parties, Applicant would take a pill, mixing the drug and alcohol to enhance the 
effect of the alcohol. (Ex. 4) It made him feel anxious, excited, and uninhibited. It 
heightened his awareness and made him more outgoing. (Tr. 95) From December 2001 
to February 2004, he used psychedelic mushrooms on three occasions. (Tr. 66) At the 
time of his last use, he was still living at his fraternity house and was offered the 
mushrooms by another fraternity member. (Tr. 66-67) In October 2002, Applicant tried 
LSD once at his fraternity house and did not like it. It had an acute effect on sound and 
made it more difficult to put thoughts together. (Tr. 70, Ex. 4) 
 
 In February 2000, Applicant the age 18 or 19 was charged with disorderly 
conduct and paid a $90 fine. Applicant and a pizza parlor employee got into an 
altercation after three pizzas were knocked onto the floor. (Tr. 55, Ex. 4) In September 
2003, he was charged with criminal mischief. He was with a group of eight friends who 
were leaving a bar when a window was broken. One of the group claimed responsibility 
for the damage. The charge against Applicant was dismissed. (Tr. 57, Ex. 4) He has 
never been arrested on drug-related charges.  
 
In March 2005, while on a trip to Jamaica, Applicant used cocaine. (Tr. 61, Ex. 4) 
Applicant and a friend used some cocaine they had purchased and threw out the rest. 
He was not interested in trying it again and did not want to have it in the room due to the 
risk it posed. (Tr. 62) In August 2005, he used hashish once while on vacation with 
friends in Morocco, which was his last illegal drug use. (Ex. 4) 
 
 It is Applicant’s intent to never use illegal drugs again. (Tr. 78, Ex. M) He asserts 
he has changed and matured during the last several years assuming greater 
responsibility for charting his life. He takes responsibility for his actions and understands 
the consequences. Illegal drug use is inconsistent with his plans for the future and what 
he hopes to accomplish in his life. (Tr. 76, Ex. 3) Applicant realizes how stupid his 
decision was to use marijuana and what he was risking.  
 
Applicant listed all of his illegal drug use on his January 2007 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (Ex. 1) and his Standard Form 
(SF) 86, Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions. (Ex. 2) He also listed his usage in his 
response to interrogatories. (Ex. 3)  
 
Applicant has $10,000 in his current company’s 401(k) retirement plan (Ex. I) and 
approximately $11,000 in a previous employer’s retirement account. (Ex. J) He has 
more than $53,000 in his savings account (Ex. K) and pays his debts in a timely 
manner. (Ex. L) Applicant signed a statement of intent agreeing to automatic revocation 
of his security clearance should he ever use illegal drugs again. (Ex. M)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 
 
4
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 
 
5
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Applicant used marijuana following high school graduation and during his 
sophomore and junior year in college. He also used: psychedelic mushrooms on three 
occasions, with his last using in 2004; used LSD once in 2002; used hashish once in 
2005; and used cocaine once in 2005. He also used Ritalin and hydrocodone in an 
unauthorized manner using it recreationally by mixing it with alcohol. In sold the 
remainder of his hydrocodone prescription in late 2002 or early 2003.  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) drug use and AG ¶ 25(c) purchase and sale apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
 
 
 
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
 Applicant last use of any illegal drug occurred in 2005. The majority of his use 
occurred while in college living in a fraternity house. The only illegal drug use not related 
to his fraternity involvement was his hashish use while on vacation in Morocco in August 
2005 and his cocaine use in March 2005. Each use was a single use.  
 
Applicant intends to never use illegal drugs again. In October 2008, he signed an 
affidavit stating he would submit to drug testing and any drug use would result in the 
loss of his clearance. He has changed, matured, and assumed greater responsibility for 
the course of his life. He takes responsibility for his actions and understands the 
consequences. Illegal drug use is inconsistent with his plans for the future and what he 
hopes to accomplish in his life. He realizes how stupid his decision was to use illegal 
drugs and what he risked. He no longer associates with individuals who use illegal 
drugs.  
 
Applicant did sell the remainder of his hydrocodone prescription, approximately 
ten pills, to a fraternity brother for twenty dollars. His action was illegal, but does not 
make him a drug pusher or supplier. This one-time event occurred five years ago. 
Viewed in context, it does not disqualify Applicant from holding a clearance.  
 
Applicant used marijuana while in college can not be said to be infrequent. 
However, his use of hashish, cocaine, LSD, and psychedelic mushrooms is best 
 
 
 
7
                                                          
described as experimental. He used mushrooms three times and the other drugs once 
each. He inappropriately used alcohol with hydrocodone 15-20 times and with Ritalin 15 
times. The use of these prescription drugs was more than experimental. However, It has 
been more than three years since his last of illegal drugs. There are no “bright line” 
rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a 
careful evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
Because of his abstention from drug use for three years, and his recognition of 
the adverse impact on his life that drug abuse could cause, the incompatibility of illegal 
use with his goals, and his stated desire never to use again, there is reasonable 
certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. Applicant did not attempt to hide 
his illegal usage. He disclosed it on his e-QIP, his SF 86, and in interrogatories. His 
illegal drug use ending more than three years ago does not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Because he will not use illegal drugs in the 
future, confidence in his current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment with 
respect to drug use is restored. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
8
AG ¶ 26(b) applies because he has stated he will not use illegal drugs in the 
future. He has demonstrated his intent not to abuse drugs in the future by the three 
years since his last use and by signing a statement of intent with automatic revocation 
of his clearance for any violation.  
 
AG ¶ 26(c) has limited applicability. He had a prescription for hydrocodone and 
misused the remaining prescription. He had no prescription for Ritalin. The abuse of 
these two prescription drugs ended in 2003 and is no longer a problem. AG ¶ 26(d) 
does not applies because he has not completed a drug treatment program. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant, while in college, 
experimented with LSD and psychedelic mushrooms. Following college, he tried 
hashish once and cocaine once. His use of marijuana was more extensive as was his 
misuse of Ritalin and hydrocodone. It appears the majority of his illegal drug use 
occurred while he was in college.  
 
He is now out of college, does not routinely see his fraternity brothers, is hard 
working, diligent, and responsible. His friends and co-workers praise his character and 
dedication. He is living within his means and is current on his debts. He has more than 
$50,000 in savings and more than $20,000 in retirement plans. His decisions reflect his 
maturity and life goals.  
 
 
 
 
9
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
