 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-16956
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jon L. Roberts, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
On December 1, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor, for whom he has worked since November 2005. (Gx. 1) After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant1
access to classified information. On April 30, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 This is assumed from the context of the statement.3
2
the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline E (personal conduct) and2
Guideline G (alcohol).
On June 19, 2008, Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on July 22, 2008, and I convened a hearing on
September 3, 2008. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented
four exhibits (Gx. 1 - 4). Applicant testified in his own behalf, submitted two exhibits (Ax.
A and B) and presented four witnesses. Another witness for Applicant was unexpectedly
called away from the hearing while waiting to testify. After consulting with the parties, I
continued this matter to September 19, 2008. At that time, Department Counsel and
Applicant’s counsel appeared in person at DOHA headquarters, while Applicant
appeared by telephone and Applicant’s fifth witness appeared by video-teleconference
(VTC). DOHA received the transcript of the September 3, 2008, hearing (Tr. I) on
September 18, 2008, and the transcript of the September 19, 2008, hearing (Tr. II) on
September 25, 2008. 
Additionally, I left the record open until September 30, 2008, to allow Applicant
time to present additional relevant information. (Tr. II, 28 - 29) Applicant timely
submitted additional information admitted without objection as Ax. C. The record closed
on October 10, 2008, when I received the parties’ written closing arguments.
Procedural Issues
Applicant’s Counsel objected to the admission of Gx. 3 based on a lack of
foundation. Gx. 3 is a three-page document sent by facsimile on April 24, 2008, to
Department Counsel by an employee in the human resources (HR) staff of a company
where Applicant worked between March and August 2004. The facsimile cover page
reads in relevant part as follows:
As a follow up to our conversation/correspondence [Applicant] was
terminated prior to [current HR manager’s]  employment with [name of3
company]. The enclosed document is the only document in [Applicant’s]
personnel file. [HR manager’s] understanding is that it was written by
[name of Applicant’s former boss] who was Vice President of Support
Services at the time.
The Directive, Section E3.1.20, provides in relevant part that “official records or
evidence compiled in the regular course of business...may be received and considered
by the Administrative Judge without authenticating witnesses, provided that such
information has been furnished by an investigative agency pursuant to its
responsibilities in connection with assisting the Secretary of Defense, or the Department
 See, Directive, E3.1.10.4
 According to a search on 5 www.google.com , Unix is “an operating system for a computer that is capable of
handling activity from multiple users. It is the most common OS for servers on the Internet.”
3
or Agency head concerned, to safeguard classified information within industry under
E.O. 10865...”
On its face, Gx. 3 was sent directly from Applicant’s former place of employment
to DOHA Department Counsel. Even if Gx. 3 was admissible under an exception to the
hearsay rule, the government did not present a witness to lay a foundation that would
allow admission under Directive E3.1.20. Accordingly, I sustained Applicant’s objection.
(Tr. I,  26 - 31)  4
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 48 years old. He graduated from college in 1982 with a degree in
mathematics. His professional experience since about 1994 has been in the information
technology (IT) sector as a Unix  administrator. Since November 2005, he has been5
employed as such by a defense contractor that is sponsoring his clearance request.
(Gx. 1) The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested for, charged
with and convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) on December 16,
2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and on July 31, 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.b). As part of the sentence for his
2004 DUI, Applicant was also alleged to have received alcohol counseling in 2007,
which resulted in a diagnosis of alcohol dependence. (SOR ¶ 1.c) The government
further alleged Applicant first consumed alcohol at age 18 and still consumes alcohol.
(SOR ¶ 1.d) Applicant admitted the facts of each allegation, but denied he is dependent
on alcohol, that he abuses alcohol, and that his alcohol consumption makes him a
security risk.
The government also alleged that, in 1999, Applicant was issued a written
warning for “disrespecting” a co-worker (SOR ¶ 2.a); that he was “dismissed” from a job
in July 2002 (SOR ¶ 2.b); that he was “fired” from a job at a restaurant in January 2003
(SOR ¶ 2.c); that he was “fired” from another restaurant job in September 2003 (SOR ¶
2.d); and that he was “dismissed” from a job in August 2004 (SOR ¶ 2.e). Applicant
admitted with explanation all of the factual allegations, but denied that he left any of his
jobs due to misconduct.
On May 10, 1999, Applicant was working for an IT firm as a Unix Administrator
when he and a co-worker argued over how to resolve a technical problem. The
argument included shouting at each other and escalated to the point his co-worker tried
to slam her office door on Applicant, who blocked the door causing it to strike his co-
worker. Both employees received written reprimands. On May 20, 1999, Applicant
received a performance evaluation from the same person who issued the written
reprimand. In the evaluation, he was rated average or above average in all categories
but one. It was noted that he needed improvement in his interpersonal skills, but the
evaluation was overall a positive one and he was given a $3,250 raise. Applicant left
that company in July 1999, after 28 months, to pursue a better opportunity. A former co-
 And possibly because he had broken his arm.6
4
worker at the company praised Applicant for his professionalism and integrity. (Answer
to SOR; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. I, 46 - 51, 101 - 103)
In July 2002, Applicant was let go from a Unix administrator’s position after only
three months and while he was still in a probationary status as a new employee. He
disclosed in his e-QIP that he was told by his employer it “was not going to work out”
there. While he had professional disagreements over how to go about his assigned
duties, a co-worker stated that Applicant was let go as part of a reduction in force and
that, in hindsight, Applicant’s technical approach should have been adopted. The co-
worker also praised Applicant for his honesty, professionalism and judgment. (Answer
to SOR; Tr. I, 52 - 54, 104) 
Applicant is currently single, but has been married twice. His first marriage ended
in 1996, when his wife of 13 years died of heart failure. He remarried in September
2000, but he and his second wife separated in September 2002. Their divorce was
finalized in March 2003. Applicant attributes the marriage’s failure to stress from the
illness and death of his father in 2001, stress from his employment downturns, and
stress from his ex-wife’s ongoing child custody battles with her ex-husband. In August
2003, Applicant moved to the state where he currently lives and works. This is the same
state where he went to college. (Gx. 1)
Between August 2002 and March 2004, Applicant had trouble finding steady
work in his chosen field. He attributed his uneven employment record during that time to
a general downturn in the IT industry and to his August 2003 relocation after his divorce.
To make ends meet, he took part-time jobs outside the IT field. Sometimes he also was
able to find concurrent temporary work in the IT field. In September 2002, he found work
as a waiter at a local restaurant. The job lasted one month because, as Applicant
acknowledged, he was not a very good waiter. Applicant has characterized as a
“personality conflict” the fact that he disagreed with the manager’s decision to let him
go. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 1; Tr. I, 104 - 106) In September 2003, a month after he
moved to the state where now lives, he found work concurrently at a carwash and as a
bartender. He stopped working at the carwash because he broke his arm on the job. He
lost his restaurant job the same month because of reorganization.  (Answer to SOR; Gx.6
1)
Applicant continued working at available IT jobs and at restaurant jobs through at
least May 2005. In March 2004, he was hired as a full-time support engineer at an IT
firm. The person who hired him for that job left the company almost immediately after
Applicant started. Applicant did not get along with the person who succeeded the
person who hired him. (Tr. I, 62 - 64; Tr. II, 10 - 15) Applicant eventually left the
company. In his response to e-QIP question 22 (Your Employment Record), Applicant
disclosed that he left this job in August 2004 under unfavorable conditions. Applicant
cited conflicting reasons for the end of his employment there (Gx. 1), but has denied
that he was fired or that the end of his employment was related to any misconduct. This
conflicts with the testimony of a former co-worker, whose understanding was that
 Not otherwise defined in the record.7
5
Applicant was fired. (Tr. I, 65 - 66; Tr. II, 15 - 17) A former member of the company’s
management characterized Applicant as “a model employee...who is honest and ethical,
hard working, professional and skilled...” (Answer to SOR)
On December 16, 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under
the influence of alcohol (DUI). He pleaded guilty, was fined, placed on supervision,  and7
ordered to complete a victim impact class. On July 31, 2004, Applicant was again
arrested and charged with DUI. He again pleaded guilty, was fined and placed on
supervision. He also was ordered to complete an alcohol safety awareness and
counseling course, and to complete 240 hours of community service. 
Both DUI offenses occurred in the state where he lived when he was married.
When he was arrested the second time, he had been visiting from out of state. Applicant
completed the community service portion and alcohol counseling portions of his
sentence in the state where he now lives. All of the requirements of his sentence were
completed satisfactorily. When he began the alcohol counseling portion, he was
provisionally diagnosed at intake as being alcohol dependent. (Gx. 2) Applicant was told
this was a standard entry required because he had two DUIs in his record. (Tr. I, 70)
The diagnosis at discharge was alcohol dependence in early partial remission. But there
was no recommendation of further treatment and no concern expressed about whether
Applicant should abstain from alcohol or participate in a 12-step recovery program.
Applicant was also assessed as having “demonstrated lower risk.” Applicant drinks
moderately when he drinks at all. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. B)
In July 2008, Applicant was evaluated about his alcohol consumption by a
Licensed Psychiatric Counselor (LPC). The evaluation included blood tests designed to
detect liver damage from excessive long-term alcohol use. The blood tests were within
normal limits, but the evaluation itself was inconclusive pending ongoing evaluation and
counseling. (Ax. A) The same LPC evaluated Applicant and gave him the same blood
tests in September 2008. The LPC concluded at that time that Applicant was not an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. The blood tests were in the normal range for liver
function. The LPC’s evaluation also reported that he has been providing Applicant with
substance abuse counseling and cognitive/behavioral therapy focusing on Applicant’s
rigidity of thinking and issues related to the loss of his first wife. A supporting
psychological evaluation included with the LPC’s evaluation showed Applicant does not
suffer from any personality disorder and is a low risk for substance abuse or
dependence. (Ax. C)
Applicant currently works in computer modeling and simulation efforts in support
of a U.S. Navy contract. His record over the past three years has been excellent.
Numerous professional and personal associates have vouched, either in person or in
writing, for Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, outstanding professional expertise,
and integrity. More importantly, his associates and friends have noted his ability to work
well with others. There have been no instances, either at work or in the community, of
inappropriate behavior by the Applicant. Applicant is active in his church, through
 Directive. 6.3.8
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).9
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
6
weekly bible study classes, he excels as a member of Toastmasters, and he is an
accomplished fast-pitch softball umpire and interscholastic wrestling referee. The
coordinator of the program through which Applicant completed his court-ordered
community service reported he “did an outstanding job of organizing and recruiting
volunteers” and “did a superior job in all tasks that were assigned to him.” (Answer to
SOR; Ax. A; Tr. I, 134 - 177)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,8
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 21 (Guideline G - Alcohol).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to9
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  10
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).11
7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.11
Analysis
Alcohol.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, that Applicant was arrested for, charged with and convicted of DUI
in December 2002 and July 2004, respectively. It also supported the allegation in SOR ¶
1.c, that Applicant received court-ordered counseling after his second DUI, and that the
counseling included a diagnosis of alcohol dependence. Finally, the record reflects that
Applicant started consuming alcohol at age 18 and still consumes alcohol, as alleged in
SOR ¶ 1.d. 
The facts established by the government’s information may raise a security
concern, because “[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” AG ¶ 21. More specifically, Applicant’s
DUI convictions require application of the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 22(a)
(alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence,
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent). 
The government’s information also tends to support application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 22(e) (evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized
alcohol treatment program) and AG ¶ 22(f) (relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or
dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program). However, the record
shows that the basis for the alcohol dependence allegation is a single-page document
entitled Discharge Summary and provided by Applicant in response to DOHA
interrogatories. SOR ¶ 2.c references the name of the facility where Applicant was
evaluated, but there is no other identifying information in the record about the facility.
Thus, it is unclear if the program Applicant attended to fulfill a court-ordered counseling
session is a recognized alcohol treatment program for purposes of AG ¶ 22(e). It is
likewise unclear whether the person who made the diagnosis is the same person who
evaluated Applicant. The signature on the form belongs to a CAC (Certified Addictions
Counselor) as opposed to a Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW). Assuming the
person making the diagnosis was qualified to do so, there is no detailed information
8
from the clinician(s) involved about his history of alcohol use or his insight into any
problem Applicant might have with alcohol. 
Further, the only known reason why Applicant was diagnosed at intake as alcohol
dependent was, as Applicant testified, it was required because he had two DUIs in his
record. There is no detailed record of testing or interview that would show the diagnosis
is anything more than a perfunctory entry required because of his arrests. (Tr. I, 70) At
the end of the counseling program, Applicant was again diagnosed as alcohol
dependent in early partial remission. However, it was reported that Applicant
“demonstrated lower risk” and “no additional treatment recommendations” were made.
Additionally, Applicant’s information regarding his evaluations in July 2008 and
September 2008 support a conclusion he is not a heavy drinker and at low risk for
alcohol dependence or abuse. There is also substantial testimony that for at least the
past three years, Applicant has led a stable, sober and responsible lifestyle. All of the
foregoing, combined with the absence of any information of heavy drinking since at
least July 2004, supports application of the mitigating factors at AG ¶ 22(a) (so much
time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). Applicant’s use of counseling and
more reliable clinical evaluations of his alcohol use also support at least partial
application of AG ¶ 22(c) (the individual is a current employee who is participating in a
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and
is making satisfactory progress). I conclude there is no history of treatment and relapse
because, despite a diagnosis of alcohol dependence, it was not recommended he
abstain from alcohol or engage in any follow-on treatment. Because he successfully
completed the court-ordered counseling program and has demonstrated he is, at most,
a moderate drinker, Applicant also benefits from AG ¶ 22(d) (the individual has
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any
required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment
program.). On balance, I conclude that the totality of information probative of the
security significance of Applicant’s use of alcohol and his past alcohol-related incidents
is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G.
Personal Conduct. 
A security concern may also exist when, as stated in AG ¶ 15, available
information reflects
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
 Closing Argument, page 7.12
9
I have reviewed the facts and circumstances of this case in the context of
Guideline E, particularly the fact that Applicant was reprimanded in 1999 after he and a
co-worker got into an argument that included door slamming and raised voices. That
event requires consideration of Guideline E disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(d)(2)
(credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and
may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined
with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to
consideration of:... (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace). 
However, contrary to Department Counsel’s argument that “Applicant has been
involved in multiple disruptive events at work that have resulted in negative job
consequences,”  I conclude that the record, at worst, shows Applicant is not a good12
waiter or bartender, that he understandably disagreed with one restaurant managers
decision to let him go, and that he had two other jobs where he was not a good fit for
what appear to be professional reasons only. Aside from the 1999 argument, there have
been no other “disruptive events” in Applicant’s employment background. In contrast to
the government’s information, the record shows Applicant has held 16 jobs without
incident since 1994. Most have been within the IT industry, with some jobs held
concurrently when the IT industry was faltering. There is ample information showing that
Applicant has been and still is an excellent employee. It must be acknowledged, as well,
that Applicant may not be a particularly easy person to get along with, owing to the
rigidity of thinking mentioned in his recent psychological evaluation. 
Nonetheless, all of the available information bearing on Applicant’s employment
history, does not support “a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information.” On the other hand, the record does support
application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). The lone disruptive workplace event
happened nearly 10 years ago and references from that job, as well as from many of
Applicant’s subsequent employers indicate his workplace behavior has not been a
problem or concern. Applicant has also engaged in behavioral counseling to improve his
ability to deal with past issues, including stress resulting from his first wife’s death. In
that regard, it is also  appropriate to apply the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(d) (the
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur). While Applicant may need help with his interpersonal skills
 See footnote 8, supra.13
10
in the workplace, available information about his conduct is sufficient to mitigate the
stated security concerns under this guideline.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and G. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 48 years
old and presumed to be a mature adult. He has experienced personal and professional
difficulties that resulted in a varied employment history between 2002 and 2005, and
may have contributed to carelessness in his use of alcohol on two occasions. However,
he has moderated and/or eliminated his drinking and is getting professional counseling
about alcohol and other behavioral issues. Applicant has been extremely candid and
forthcoming about his employment history and alcohol consumption. Indeed, much of
the information which supports the SOR allegations originated with him. In contrast to
the adverse facets of his background, the record shows Applicant is honest, active in
the community, hard working, and professional. His alcohol-related conduct occurred
more than four years ago, he is at low risk of future alcohol dependence or abuse, and
the one documented instance of disruptive behavior in the workplace occurred nearly 10
years ago. His job performance in the past three years has been excellent. Over the
same period, he has been more stable personally and professionally. A fair and
commonsense assessment  of all available information shows Applicant has satisfied13
any doubts about his suitability for access to classified information.
11
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a - 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
