  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------   )       ISCR Case No. 07-16710
SSN: ---------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ray Nichols, Esq.  
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on May 23, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to an
administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues in this
case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of financial
problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on June 30, 2008, and
he requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2008. The hearing
took place as scheduled on September 24, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on
October 2, 2008. 
The record was kept open until October 8, 2008, to provide Applicant an
opportunity to submit additional documentary evidence. He did so, and those matters
were forwarded to me by department counsel who raised no objections. Accordingly,
Applicant’s resume or CV is admitted as Exhibit K. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges 23 delinquent debts in various amounts for a
total of about $23,022. It also alleges that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in
1996, although the case was dismissed due to failure to file the required schedules. And
it alleges that the IRS filed a federal tax lien against Applicant in 2007 for $32,029. In a
detailed six-page Answer, Applicant admitted all the allegations except for the debts in
SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.n, and 1.o, and he provided explanations for his situation in general and
for each debt. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are
established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 36-year-old engineer. He has worked for his current employer
since December 2005, and he has received two promotions in pay grade in the last
three years. His annual gross income is approximately $100,000. He is assigned to a
department that works on advanced systems and technology, and he serves as a
technical lead for the company on various Defense Department programs. His work has
included filing 22 provisional patents in the last 24 months. His wife, whom he married in
June 2008, is employed as an engineer by the same company. Together, they have a
gross income of more than $200,000 per year.  
His employment history includes military service in the U.S. Army, which ended
in an honorable discharge in 1996. Thereafter, his primary occupation was student, as
he earned a B.S. in physics in 2000 with a GPA of 3.81 on a 4.0 scale. He continued his
studies earning a Ph.D. in physics in 2004 with a GPA of 3.96 on a 4.0 scale. In addition
3
to his studies, Applicant worked as a research scientist for the same university during
1999–2005. 
His personal history includes three marriages with the first two ending in divorce.
He has a child from his first marriage, and he pays $900 per month in child support and
is current with that obligation. 
His first marriage from May 1993 to about June 1995 coincided with his service
as an enlisted solider in the Army that ended in 1996. Young and in debt from the
marriage, Applicant sought relief by filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in June 1996
(Exhibit 6). The bankruptcy court dismissed his case a few months later due to failure to
file the required schedules. Applicant explained he elected to allow this to happen
because he decided to resolve the debts himself rather than through bankruptcy.
During 2003–2005, he became involved as a founding scientist for a startup
company. It did not succeed and ceased operations in about October 2005. As founding
scientist, Applicant was essentially self-employed as a consultant for the company. In
turn, this resulted in the IRS tax debt when Applicant did not pay the required self-
employment taxes. In September 2007, the IRS took collection action against Applicant
for tax-period 2005 via a federal tax lien for $32,029 (Exhibits 7 and H). Sometime
thereafter, Applicant entered into an installment payment agreement with the IRS at the
rate of $400 per month. As of July 2, 2008, the current balance was $34,345, which
includes penalty and interest. Applicant wants to pay this off sooner than scheduled by
making additional payments. 
He married his second wife in 2001 when he was a graduate student. They lived
in apartments until they bought a home in about July 2005. The debt for $5,079 alleged
in SOR ¶ 1.d stems from an apartment they lived in from March 2003 to July 2005.
Applicant denies this debt and maintains the apartment was clean and without damage
when they departed. He has attempted to resolve the debt via calls and letters without
success (Exhibit A). He is willing to pay the debt if the company can provide an
accounting to justify it. Otherwise, he does not intend to pay this debt. 
Applicant’s second marriage ended in 2006, a few months after he completed his
security-clearance application (Exhibit 1) and about a year after they bought the home.
Applicant never saw it coming and was taken by surprise by this circumstance. He was
left with a mortgage loan and a car loan, both based on a two-income household, and
his child-support obligation. As a result, Applicant became delinquent on many bills as
he admits in response to the SOR. 
The two small debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o, which Applicant denied, are
included in the IRS tax debt in SOR ¶ 1.x. Otherwise, Applicant has paid or settled the
other debts alleged in the SOR except as otherwise noted. He established this by his
testimony (which I found credible) and his documentary evidence (Exhibits B, C, D, E,
F, G, I, and J). 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
4
Two exceptions are the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.t. The debt in ¶ 1.m
is for $1,100, and Applicant is attempting to determine the status of the account, to
include the current creditor. He is willing and able to pay it once he confirms the account
(Answer; Tr. 53, 61). The $1,621 debt alleged in ¶ 1.t stems from a car loan Applicant
had several years ago (Answer; Tr. 63). He contacted the creditor and has been
informed he does not owe any money. This debt does not appear on recent credit
reports (Exhibits 3 and 4). 
The third exception is the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p, which alleges Applicant was
past due on the mortgage loan for the house from his second marriage. The mortgage
loan had an adjustable interest rate and Applicant fell behind when the rate adjusted
higher. The mortgage loan is now current (Tr. 62, 75–76). Applicant is now renting this
home as he relocated in connection with his job and third marriage in June 2008. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any5
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order6
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and m itigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 13. 15
5
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
6
indicates inability (not unwillingness) to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting16
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The bankruptcy case, the17
federal tax lien, and the other delinquent debts are more than sufficient to establish
these two disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 
All the mitigating conditions have been considered and three justify discussion.
First, Applicant receives credit in mitigation under MC 2 because his financial
problems, in large part, resulted from his divorces in 1996 and 2006, and he has acted
responsibly under the circumstances. For the first divorce in 1996, Applicant acted
responsibly by deciding not to purse the Chapter 7 bankruptcy to conclusion and
instead resolved the debt himself. For the second divorce in 2006, Applicant acted
responsibly by taking on most of the marital debt, to include the mortgage loan and car
loan. 
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2 (listing nine factors to consider under the whole-person concept). 18
7
Second, Applicant receives credit under MC 4. Financially, Applicant is a bit
scattered or haphazard. He would be wise to spend more time and brain power (of
which he has plenty) staying on top of money matters and learning about the subject of
personal finance, which would provide him an opportunity to achieve financial success.
Nevertheless, his efforts to pay his creditors and enter into an installment payment
agreement with the IRS is sufficient to qualify as initiating a good-faith effort within the
meaning of the guideline. 
Third, Applicant receives credit under MC 5. He disputes the $5,079 debt with a
former landlord and has provided documented proof to establish the basis for the
dispute (Exhibit A). 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant met his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
whole-person concept  was given due consideration and that analysis supports a18
favorable decision. Applicant appears to be a highly educated and successful engineer
with the potential to increase his income as he has already done with his current
employer. He has sufficient financial means (a household gross income of more than
$200,000 per year) to resolve any remaining delinquent debts should they be
established, adhere to his agreement with the IRS, and remain current on his bills and
expenses. Likewise, with such income, the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation,
or duress in the context of classified information is remote. This case is decided for
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.y: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
