                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of:                                            ) 
                                                                  )             
 ------------------------                                  )      ISCR Case No. 07-15843 
           SSN: ----------------                                  ) 
                                                                            ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                       ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo-Gordon, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his handling protected 
information and alleged under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline K 
(Handling Protected Information). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
On December 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline K Handling Protected Information. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
            Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 22, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on June 10, 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 20, 2008, for a hearing on August 12, 
2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 
32, which were received without objection. The exhibits include many government and 
corporate documents relating to requirements imposed by the National Industrial 
Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) (Exhs. 4 and 5), and the implementation 
of those documents by the corporate employer.  
 
            Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Exhibits A-L which were 
admitted without objection. An index for both sets of documents was submitted and 
appended to each one. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 20, 
2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
            Applicant is a 46-year-old test supervisor for a defense contractor with 11 
technicians working for him at 15 test stations that are considered classified because of 
the test data that is inputted on them. He attended a community college and has an 
associate’s degree. He served in the Navy for 21 years and was discharged in 2001 as 
an E-7. He has held a security clearance during and since his military service for a total 
of 28 years (Exh. F). He has worked for his present employer and the former owner 
since his discharge from the Navy. The allegations center around a series of security 
incidents involving his staff of technicians and three in which he solely was a participant.  
 
            Sometime in early 2003, Applicant was given the additional duty of Information 
Systems Security Officer (ISSO) for his group. Applicant was briefed on his duties by 
the ISSM when he was named ISSO and given some additional training. The total 
training given to Applicant is detailed at Exh. 32 (a-p). His staff of technicians was also 
given annual training. After several of the staff violations occurred, Applicant requested 
the ISSM to provide training every six months. His request was granted (Tr. 103).  
 
            At the time the additional duties were assigned, Applicant was working ten hours 
a day and weekends on a rush project for a customer of his employer (Tr. 25 and 186). 
During the next three years or until July 2006 a number of security incidents occurred 
which are the subject of five of the allegations in the SOR. These incidents were 
committed by one or more of the eleven members of the technical staff whom he 
supervised. Applicant and the violators were both held responsible. Applicant was 
counseled, given written warnings, and, for the last incident, suspended for three days 
without pay. All of these incidents are SOR allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1 (a., b., d., e., and g.)). 
Two other violations occurred (SOR ¶¶ 1 (c. and f.)) for which he was personally 
involved and admits in his answer. 
 
            The security incidents by Applicant’s staff were as follows: 
 
1. Unauthorized use of another employee’s password in June 2004 (SOR ¶ 1 (a)) 
(Exh. 7); 
 
            2. Improper installation of software in June 2004 (SOR ¶ 1 (b));  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
           3. Improper access to test station in May 2006 (SOR ¶ 1 (e.)) (Exh. 26);  
 
4. A trusted down-loading incident (taking unclassified information from a 
classified work station) on March 3, 2006, (SOR ¶ 1 (d)) (Exh. 25); and, 
  
5. A second incident involving trusted downloading by an employee who had not 
been trained to do so occurred on July 27, 2006 (SOR ¶ 1 (g)) (Exh. 28).  
 
           Applicant observed the May 2006 violation and reported it to his superiors. Both 
Applicant and the staff member were reprimanded (Tr.45-47). Applicant also advised 
the employee in the July 2006 incident that he was not qualified to do downloading and 
suggested others who should do it for him. However, the employee ignored his 
Applicant’s instruction and did it himself (Tr. 49). After the second trusted downloading 
incident by his staff members in 2006, Applicant’s ISSO duties were terminated later in 
the year (Exh. 28).  
 
           According to the Master System Security Plan adopted by Applicant’s company 
(Exh. 11), the Information System Security Manager (ISSM) “has the oversight 
responsibility for the development, implementation, and evaluation of the facility’s IS 
Security Program.” The ISSM appoints and delegates certain responsibilities to an ISSO 
(Exhs. 10 and 11). The company had a classified test station which consisted of a 
series of classified computers in a secured area. Everyone who worked in the area had 
a clearance. It was the responsibility of the ISSM to set up the initial user accounts and 
access privileges.  
 
           The first alleged security violation for which Applicant admits responsibility (SOR 
¶1 (c)) was in October 29, 2005, when he failed to properly set an alarm in a protected 
area as he left the building (Exh. 24). The alarm should have buzzed when operational 
but it did not. He left the building before making certain that it was properly set. He was 
given a written warning. The alarm system had created problems for others as well as 
for him according to his supervisor (Exh. B). The protected area of the building was 
locked and no compromise of security or tampering was discovered (Exh. 24 p. 2). 
 
           The second alleged security violation for which Applicant admits responsibility 
(SOR ¶1 (f)) occurred on June 26, 2006, (Exh. 27) when he was called by one of his 
staff on an unsecure phone while he was on the way to the airport at the beginning of a 
weekend. The employee needed access to a classified safe. Applicant gave him the 
combination over the phone but advised him to have the combination immediately 
changed. However, the staff member did not follow his instruction and waited until the 
following Monday morning to have the combination changed. The incident was recorded 
in Applicant’s personnel file for 18 months, and he and his staff member were required 
to re-take safe responsibility training. He was also given a written warning for incident.  
 
           The last alleged incident in which Applicant was personally involved was on 
March 19, 2007, eight months after his ISSO duties were terminated (SOR ¶1 (i)) (Exh. 
29). A security audit by a Defense Security Service representative found six unmarked 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
media disks on Applicant’s desk and, according to the SOR, approximately 75 
unmarked media disks on a shelf behind his desk. Applicant believed there were only a 
total of 50. The security incident report on this matter indicated confusion as to the 
extent of markings on the disks and the location of the disks at issue (Exh. 3, p. 6).  
 
            All the disks had been in the possession of a former employee who recently 
died. Applicant was asked by his manager to review the disks, all of them unmarked, 
and determine whether classified material was on them. This was an extra duty which 
he had been doing over a three month period as of July 2007. He had reviewed the 
disks on the shelf which were in a box marked “unclassified” and determined that there 
was no classified information on any of them, but had not affixed individual markings on 
the disks. He had not reviewed the six disks on his desk and they were unmarked. For 
this incident he was suspended without pay for five days and removed from supervisory 
responsibility for classified information (Tr. 82-100).  
 
            Counsel for Applicant contended at the hearing that the failure to apply markings 
was not a violation of corporate regulations or of Section 4-212 of the NISPOM (Exh. 4). 
That section provides that wholly unclassified material need not be marked unless two 
conditions apply. There was no evidence submitted at the hearing to show that those 
conditions were applicable. A contra corporate position of the ISSM appears in the 
record that indicates all disks must be individually marked whether classified or 
unclassified (Exh. 29).  
 
            An Administrative Inquiry was conducted in 2006 by the Defense Security 
Service concerning the incidents that had occurred as of that time. A report was issued 
on August 23, 2006 (Exh. 2) finding a pattern of negligence and forwarding the matter to 
DISCO for appropriate action. An administrative inquiry (ASC) was conducted by the 
corporate employer after the discovery of the last incident in March 2007. At that time 
no punishment for the 2007 incident had been imposed. A report was issued on March 
28, 2007 (Exh. 31). It stated that Applicant “was involved in four minor security incidents 
(deviations), one infraction and one violation (involving compromise of classified 
materials) in the past 18 months.” The recommendations of the ASC were based on the 
one violation (communicating safe combination over phone), the infraction (alarm 
issue), and the most recent incident (disk marking) which it characterized as a 
“deviation”. The deviations involving staff members were discounted as indicative of 
security leadership weakness. 
 
            The inquiry concluded that Applicant was unable or unwilling to comply with 
security rules and there was a clear pattern of negligence. The inquiry recommended a 
written warning, an adverse information report to DSS, and counseling of Applicant and 
his manager on importance of compliance. In addition the report recommended that the 
manager with access to the closed area should brief all employees on the importance of 
marking all media. The report recommended no follow up activity or any changes in 
policy or procedure. The report relied on the Progressive Discipline for Security 
Incidents guidelines (Exhs. 19 and 20).  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
            One allegation, (SOR ¶1 (h)), does not allege any specific conduct but recites 
the facts alleged noting that two incidents by Applicant’s staff were repeat offenses and 
five of them involved classified computers. It recites the DSS conclusion that the facts 
indicate a pattern of “negligence and carelessness” and that an Administrative Inquiry 
(ASC) was conducted and forwarded to DISCO. These facts are consistent with the 
record.  
 
            Applicant had no security violations in his career before he was named ISSO. At 
the time of the termination of his additional duty as ISSO, a new full time ISSO was 
named. After he was terminated as an ISSO in 2006, he had one security incident that 
involved him personally (SOR ¶ 1 (i)) concerning unmarked media disks on March 19, 
2007. He has had no security incidents since the 2007 incident (Exhs. F and I).  
 
            Three letters from Applicant’s supervisors at three supervisory levels, and 
numerous performance appraisals, evaluations, and awards were submitted in evidence 
(Exhs. A, B, and C). These letters describe him as scrupulous and conscientious about 
security issues. They all recommended that he retain his security clearance. The 
evaluations describe Applicant as a dedicated, conscientious, and highly-valued 
employee. He is described as hard working, ethical, honest, trustworthy, and reliable. 
Applicant is divorced and has three adult children (Tr. 21-24). 
 
Policies 
 
            When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
            A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
            Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct   
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
            AG ¶ 16 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying. The following is the only one that is potentially applicable:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
            Applicant’s conduct was also alleged under Guideline K (Handling Protected 
Information), as addressed below. That conduct constitutes credible adverse 
information in another adjudicative issue area that may not be sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It is also personal 
conduct that could create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
            AG ¶¶ 16(c) is sufficiently raised for consideration. Conditions that could mitigate 
Personal Conduct security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 17. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
            The discussion under the guideline for Handling Protected Information is equally 
appropriate for this guideline. Additionally, Applicant has been open and honest about 
the violations in his testimony and earlier statements. This has reduced any potential 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. The above mitigating conditions 
are applicable.  
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
            The same allegations alleged under Guideline E as security concerns were also 
alleged under Guideline K Handling Protected Information set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
            AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal or 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, “palm” 
or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
             
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
            AG ¶ 33 addresses “[d]eliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and 
regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive information.” Applicant’s actions 
regarding the violations for which he was personally involved were not deliberate 
security violations. Negligence is commonly defined as the failure to use reasonable 
care under the circumstances. It is the doing of something which a reasonably prudent 
person would not do, or the failure to do something which a reasonably prudent person 
would do under like circumstances. The government characterized Applicant’s actions 
as careless or negligent to which Applicant admitted. After considering all the evidence, 
I conclude that he was negligent in those three incidents. Applicant’s actions were 
sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 34(g) and (h) for consideration.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Handling Protected Information security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 35. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
 
            Applicant was chosen to be an ISSO in addition to his regular duties. He had 
never held the duty before but he trained for it and attempted to insure through 
accelerated training that his staff was prepared. However, incidents occurred caused by 
others for which he was held responsible and given punishment despite his best efforts 
to insure that they were not repeated. He has been appropriately disciplined for all of 
the incidents including the ones actually committed by his staff without his knowledge, 
direction, or permission.  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
            Applicant no longer has the ISSO additional duties. He approaches the 
discharge of his security responsibilities with a positive attitude and has had no further 
difficulties since the disk marking incident. While he had three violations in which he 
was personally involved as the administrative inquiry found, he was punished for all of 
them. The first two resulted in warnings and he was suspended for five days without pay 
for the third. However, the three incidents in which Applicant was personally involved 
were quite different as to the type of security issues involved and the classification of 
the three as an infraction, a violation, and a deviation. 
 
            The Progressive Discipline process applies increasing penalties as sequential 
violations of a similar nature occur. Several of those for which his staff was involved 
were similar in that they involved the use of classified equipment. The discipline did 
increase for the last of the two trusted downloading staff incidents that occurred within a 
three month period. The second one resulted in removal of ISSO responsibilities from 
Applicant. No further action was recommended by the ASC corporate inquiry.  
 
            While the conclusion of the ASC is not binding on the government which 
characterized them at the hearing as only “opinions” that neither bound the government, 
nor precluded further government action, the ASC makes rational and sensible findings 
in view of the circumstances of this case. I find that Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
            Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
            (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
           Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Security violations are one of the 
strongest possible reasons for denying or revoking access to classified information, as 
they raise very serious questions about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information. Once it is established that an applicant has committed a security violation, 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
he or she has a very heavy burden of demonstrating that he or she should be entrusted 
with classified information. Because security violations strike at the very heart of the 
industrial security program, an administrative judge must give any claims of reform and 
rehabilitation strict scrutiny.  
 
In many security clearance cases, applicants are denied a clearance for having 
an indicator of a risk that they might commit a security violation (e.g., alcohol abuse, 
delinquent debts or drug use). No such indicator or any other indicator has occurred in 
this case.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has held that supervisors can be held responsible for 
security violations by members of their staff. The most recent decision so holding was 
ISCR Case No. 06-21537 (App. Bd. February 2, 2008) where the Board reversed a 
decision granting clearance to a supervisor who had a pattern of gross negligence, and 
had failed to favorably respond to the security violations or to have a positive attitude 
towards security duties. The facts of this case do not indicate that either failure is 
applicable to Applicant. 
 
Security violation cases reveal more than simply an indicator of risk but in ISCR 
Case No. 03-26888 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2006) cited by the government, the applicant was 
found to have disregarded procedures and tried to conceal violations. No evidence of 
such conduct was established in this matter and, in fact, Applicant reported at least one 
incident when he was the only person to know of it, and he was punished with the staff 
violator. He also directed another staff member not to do what he then proceeded to do 
that resulted in a security incident. The frequency and duration of the security violations 
are also aggravating factors, but in ISCR Case no 97-0435 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998) the 
case cited by the government for this issue, there was evidence of deliberate security 
violations over a ten year period.  
 
The three incidents for which Applicant was personally involved were viewed by 
the ASC as a single violation, a single infraction, and a single deviation. They were each 
a different type of security violations committed over a period of 18 months with little, if 
any, consistent pattern as to the facts or even the gravity of the incidents.  
 
Applicant is a dedicated, trustworthy employee who was in over his head as an 
ISSO. His duties were more than he could effectively perform in addition to his basic 
required duties. He could not watch every action of his staff and others in the work 
environment.  Yet he was held responsible for them. He took steps to insure that 
adequate training was provided to insure that violations did not occur. He did as much 
as could be expected of him. There is no real potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress and the likelihood of continuation or recurrence of the same 
behavior is very low. He has met his heavy burden.  
 
Applicant’s conduct at the hearing and the quality of the answers to questions 
from both of the counsel and from me indicated complete honesty, and a willingness to 
accept responsibility for those actions for which he should have accepted responsibility. 
He did not attempt to shift blame to others but realistically explained the difficulty of 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
attempting to insure full compliance by all members of the staff and others who had 
access to the classified stations. The government conceded at the hearing that the case 
was “somewhat circumstantial” (Tr. 159) and clearly it is. I am convinced that there are 
no lingering concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness that justify 
removal of his security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his handling 
protected information and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
            Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
               Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.I:  For Applicant  
 
             Paragraph 2, Guideline K:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
         Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
            In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     _________________                       
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge 
