                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-16835
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Bruce M. Kaufman, Attorney At Law
December 8, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Personnel Security Questionnaire, (SF-86) on August 10,
1989.  On May 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H and E
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 14, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another
Administrative Judge on August 25, 2008.  The matter was transferred to the
undersigned Administrative Judge on on October 20, 2008.  A notice of hearing was
issued on September 15, 2008, scheduling the hearing for October 27, 2008.  The
Government offered seven exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 7,
which were received without objection. Applicant called seven witnesses and offered
eight exhibits, referred to Applicant’s Exhibits A through H.  He also testified on his own
behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on November 3, 2008 for
receipt of additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit
2
consisting of two enclosures.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on
November 4, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of United States
Code, Title 21, Sections 802 and 812 which define the Controlled Substance Act.
Applicant had no objection.  (Tr. p. 24).  The request and the attached documents were
not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record. The facts administratively
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.
Motion to Amend SOR
On August 22, 2008, by written motion, Department Counsel moved to amend
the SOR by adding ¶ 1.c, alleging “You were arrested on November 26, 1981, in
Norwalk, CA and charged with (1) Possession of a Controlled Narcotic, and (2)
Possession of Concentrated Cannabis.  You went to court and proceedings were
suspended pending pre-trial diversion.  You successfully completed the program and
the case was dismissed.  (Tr. pp. 5 -6.)  Applicant’s counsel had no objection to the
motion.  (Tr. p. 6).  The motion to amend the SOR was granted. 
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 49 years old and married.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as an Aircraft Electronic Technician, and is applying for a security clearance
in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because the Applicant engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.
The Applicant began using marijuana while he was in the United States Navy
from 1976 until 1980.  He did not hold a security clearance at that time.  On November
26, 1981, he was arrested and charged with (1) Possession of a Controlled Substance,
and (2) Possession of Concentrated Cannabis.  At court, the proceedings were
suspended pending pre-trial diversion.  He successfully completed the diversion
program and the case was dismissed.       
In 1984, the Applicant began working for his current employer.  Since then, he
has had different job classifications, some of which required a DoD security clearance,
others that have not.  He has held a Top Secret security clearance, without incident for
3
the past ten years.  He indicates that he has disclosed his 1981 drug arrest on his
security clearance applications as required.  
In June 2006, while holding a Top Secret DoD security clearance, the Applicant
attended a wake for a friend who had passed away.  Later that night, a few friends,
including the Applicant, got together to smoke marijuana that the decedent had.  The
Applicant smoked some marijuana and then went to bed.  That night, he slept in his
truck, got up the next day, and drove home.  By then, he no longer felt the effects of the
marijuana.  (Tr. p. 97).  Four days later, the Applicant’s employer required him to
undergo a drug and alcohol screening test due to an industrial accident related to his
work.  The test came back positive for marijuana use.  The Applicant admitted that he
had smoked marijuana at his friend’s wake but had not smoked it at any other time
since then.  He was immediately placed on leave by his company, and required to enroll
in a Drug Rehabilitation Program.  He attended the program everyday for three weeks.
At night he attended Narcotic Anonymous meetings.  He also attended counseling
sessions with a psychologist, and underwent drug testing weekly.  He completed the
program.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit).  Two months after the incident, he was
permitted to return to work.  Presently, the Applicant continues to participate in the drug
testing program, which is random testing for drugs and alcohol.  The Applicant was
informed by his company that if he tests positive again, he will be facing termination.
(Tr. p. 104). All of his drug tests since the incident have come back negative.      
A Statement of Intent was submitted by the Applicant that indicates that he will
never use any marijuana or any other illegal drug again.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H and Tr.
P. 106).  
  
The Applicant indicates that this has been a real lesson, a slap in the face.  He is
extremely remorseful for his conduct.  This has been the biggest embarrassment for
him.  He worries about it every night.  (Tr. p. 111).  
Seven character witnesses testified on behalf of the Applicant, including his
present manager, his past site manager, and other professional colleagues who have
worked with the Applicant, some of who know him as a friend.  They all attest to his
reliability and trustworthiness.  He is considered to be extremely ethical and an
outstanding employee.  (Tr. pp. 26-31, 41-46, 56-61, 65-70, 75-79, 82-86, and 91-112). 
  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
4
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25. (a) any drug abuse;
25. (b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
25. (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26. (b).(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16. (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances.
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
5
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes.
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and personal conduct that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant
(Guideline E).  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude
there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
6
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines H and E of the SOR.
I have considered all of the evidence presented in this case, including all of the
favorable witness testimony and the accomplishments of the Applicant.  In spite of his
letter of intent, the coincidence of him testing positive on a drug test after what he says
is his only use of marijuana is highly improbable and difficult to believe.  The evidence
shows that the Applicant used marijuana while holding a DoD security clearance.  He
used marijuana knowing that it was prohibited by law and clearly prohibited by the
Department of Defense.  This demonstrates poor judgment,  untrustworthiness and
unreliability.  As recently as June 2006, he tested positive for marijuana during a drug
screening conducted by his company.  The Applicant is not currently eligible for a
security clearance.  If he can remain drug free, he may be eligible for a security
clearance sometime in the future, but not now.  His recent use of marijuana in 2006,
absolutely prohibits a favorable determination in this case.     
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions, 25(a) any drug
abuse, 25(b) testing positive for illegal drug use, and 22(g) any illegal drug use after
being granted a security clearance apply.  Mitigating Condition 26(b)(4) a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation applies.
Despite this, I find his past use of illegal drugs to be recent and of security significance.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions,16(c) credible
adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as
a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information applies.  None of the mitigating conditions are
applicable in this case.  Consequently, I find against the Applicant under Guideline E,
Personal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 49 years old, a veteran,
mature,  intelligent, successful, well respected, and a long time employee of the defense
industry who has held a security clearance for many years.  Why he used marijuana
while holding a security clearance is bizarre.  Why he used marijuana at all is even
more of a mystery.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set
forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole person assessment
of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, an unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and does meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information at this time.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal
Conduct).    
7
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.                                                
  
  FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.                                                                                                                     
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
