1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11263
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on May 25,
2005. On May 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 1, 2008, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July
17, 2008. I received the case assignment on July 21, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on July 24, 2008, for a hearing on August 27, 2008. I convened the hearing as
scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government offered eight exhibits (Exhs 1-8) that were
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted 22 exhibits (Exhs. A-V) that
were admitted without objection. She testified on her own behalf. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 8, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to
keep the record open until September 25, 2008, to submit additional evidence. On
September 19, 2008, she submitted five additional exhibits (W 1-5). They were admitted
without objection. At my request a current report on her finances was requested and
supplied (Exh. X). 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a government contractor working as a
computer data modeler in support of an Air Force program since May 16 2006.
In her Answer, Applicant admitted four and denied three financial allegations in
the SOR relating to over $ 35,000 in delinquent debts. She disputes one of the denied
debts and avers that the other two have been paid. She admitted the single personal
conduct allegation related to testing positive for cocaine in January 2005 from a use in
December 2004. 
Applicant’s annual salary from her employment is approximately $78,000. She
has modest savings of over $2,000. She received a bachelor’s degree in computer
science in 1986. After graduation she was employed by a major U.S. company until
1993. Between 1993 and 1997, she worked for several companies as an independent
contractor traveling extensively in the U.S. She then held positions between 1997 and
2003 in data modeling and management and with two companies that paid her over
$80,000 per annum. She was terminated for absenteeism on July 24, 2003, and was
unable to find work for 22 months until she obtained her present employment 2005. 
Applicant’s absenteeism was the result of a serious auto accident in the late
1990's, followed by a second more serious accident in 2001 that resulted in spinal
surgery and extensive therapy (Exh. O). She was able to take two months of medical
leave under the Family Medical Leave Act, but her employer did not provide any
additional sick leave so she missed a significant number of work days. It was during this
time that her husband left her with two daughters ages eight and three. 
Applicant received unemployment compensation for some of the duration of her
unemployment (Exh. P), but went into debt to support herself and her children. During
this period she sold her home and made a profit of $13,000 which partially
supplemented her unemployment compensation. She now rents her home for $1,200
per month.
3
Applicant is now a single mother with two daughters ages nine and fourteen. The
father of her older daughter is her divorced husband. The father of the younger
daughter is a former fiancé whom she did not marry. Applicant first married her husband
in 1993 and was divorced in 1996. She married him again in 2000 and he moved out in
2002 after her second auto accident. He expressed a desire to adopt the second
daughter but did not. However, he has a paternal interest in her since she has never
known another father. He paid child support for his own daughter during the period
between 1996 and 2000 but has not paid any child support for either girl since that time.
However, he now voluntarily contributes health insurance through his employer for both
children. 
Applicant met with a credit repair service in September 2007 and engaged the
company in January 2008 (Exh. R). However, she discovered that their charges were
excessive and more than she could afford (Exhs. Q). She terminated the service after
paying some fees but proceeded to resolve the debts on her own. She attempted
negotiation with some of her creditors with success. She has paid or settled all but two
of the debts alleged plus some that were not alleged (Exh. D, Tr. 30). The remaining
debts are the two largest that were alleged (SOR ¶¶ 1. c., and e). Both of those
creditors refused any settlement, compromise, or scheduled payments. Each insisted
on payment of the full amount of the debts which she could not do. Applicant now has
secured a bank loan for $18,000 made with her father as co-signer (Exh. W 1). She is
making monthly payments on this loan until final arrangements are made for funds to be
disbursed to those creditors (Exhs. X 1 and 2). She has developed a budget showing
sufficient income to pay her bills and the remaining two debts (Exh. W 2). 
Applicant’s delinquent debts as alleged on the SOR and their status are as
follows:
1. SOR ¶ 1.a. Cable service debt of $397. Paid in full (Exh. F) (Tr. 23). 
2. SOR ¶ 1. b. Discover Card debt of $2,139. Settled for $1,083 (Exh. G) (Tr. 24).
3. SOR ¶ 1.c. USAA Savings Bank credit card debt of $14,790 charged off but
attempts to negotiate have been conducted since January 2008 and now subject
to negotiated settlement of $11,000 to be paid with new loan co-signed with
Applicant’s father.(Exh. H and W 1) (Tr. 24). 
4. SOR ¶ 1.d. AT&T bill of $585 was paid in full in January 2008. (Exh. I) (Tr. 26).
5. SOR ¶ 1.e. Chase Bank credit card debt of $18,290 in collection. Attempts to
negotiate have been conducted since February 2008 and now subject to
negotiated settlement of $8,000 to be paid with new loan co-signed with
Applicant’s father (Tr. 27) (Exh. J and W 1). 
6. SOR ¶ 1.f. Target charge account of $1,126. Had a settlement offer that was
withdrawn but paid in full in June 2008 (Tr. 28) ( Exh. K).
4
7. SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant disputes this $540 debt in correspondence with collection
agency over four months without success (Tr. 29). It is still in dispute but she will
resolve it if the dispute is unsuccessful. 
Applicant’s problems with her former husband has resulted in two civil allegations
of unfitness. The first occurred in 2004 and the Child Protective Service (CPS) cleared
her of culpability. The second occurred in January 2005 when she was given a hair
follicle test that found traces of cocaine that she had used at a party in December 2004.
She acknowledged this one time use. The CPS removed her daughters from her care
and gave them to her former husband for two months at which time they were restored
to her custody. She was employed several months later by her present employer who
gives random drug tests to employees. She has never tested positive since then. This
positive test for cocaine is the subject of the single allegation under Guideline E. 
Applicant had no reason to believe that this one time drug experimentation was
an indicator of a drug abuse problem that required drug treatment or counseling and did
not have it. However, she has taken counseling for the stress issues in her life that has
caused her to make some bad choices (Exh. W 5). She has received medical attention
for these concerns and problems relating to work and stressors in her life (Exh. 7). She
expressed remorse for her 2004 drug use and has learned a great lesson since it cost
her the custody of her daughters for a short period. 
Applicant is highly regarded by the senior government leader in the office where
she works to support a government program. Also, she is regarded as trustworthy,
conscientious, and reliable by fellow employees who have worked with her over the past
three years. They admire her ability to be a successful single mother of two very active
girls, and hold a responsible position with a government contractor in industry (Exhs. T,
U, and V).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), an "inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), "a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise
security concerns.” Applicant accumulated the delinquent debts cited in the SOR several
6
years ago and had not resolved them with her creditors. Thus, the evidence clearly
raises these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of mitigating conditions (MC) that could
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(e) the
security concern may be mitigated when the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute
the legitimacy of the past-due debt that is the cause of the problem, and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue. He disputed both debts through his credit repair service but
later acknowledged their existence and has taken steps to pay or settle them. 
Under AG ¶ 20.(a.), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Most of Applicant=s financial
problems arose as a result of her divorce and unemployment for 22 months before her
present employment in 2005. She has been working to resolve her accumulated
delinquent debts. She paid or settled all of them except the two largest credit card debts.
She attempted to settle them or pay them in installments but the creditors would not
agree to anything except full one time payments. Through a loan co-signed by her father
she is now capable and prepared to resolve those debts and pay off the bank loan in
regular installments. 
Evidence that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is
a potentially mitigating condition under AG & 20 (c). Applicant engaged a credit repair
service but discovered that the charges were excessive and terminated the service.
Then she proceeded to resolve the debts on her own. She has received professional
counseling for the stressful issues in her life that has been part of the cause of the
difficulties involved in this matter. 
AG & 20.(d) provides a mitigating condition where the evidence shows the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts. While it not necessary that all of the delinquent debts be resolved for mitigation to
apply, it is necessary that a significant portion of the debts be settled or paid. I conclude
that all of the above cited mitigating conditions are applicable. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG & 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, and
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about and an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
7
Conditions that could raise a security concern and be disqualifying include under
AG ¶ 16 (c):
Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole person assessment
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of condor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.
The guideline also provides certain mitigating conditions two of which are
applicable to this matter. The first is under AG ¶ 17.(c) that the offense is so minor, or so
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement. While any use of a harmful
drug is not minor, here the use occurred four years ago and was a one-time incident
which is not likely to recur. The MC applicable. 
The second MC is under AG ¶ 17.(d) in that the individual has acknowledged the
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused the inappropriate behavior
and such behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant has acknowledged the behavior and
taken steps to alleviate the circumstances that caused it by counseling with a women’s
therapy group to help her cope with some of the stressful issues in her life (Exh. W 5).
She did not seek drug counseling because she believed the one time experimental use
was not an indicator of a drug use or abuse. She admitted her positive test for use of
cocaine in 2004, and the circumstances surrounding it on her SF 86 and in her answer
and interrogatories. She has been candid about the marital difficulties she has had and
her medical problems. The record is replete with information most of which she has
voluntarily supplied. The MC is applicable. II see no likelihood that any similar conduct
would recur or cause problems in the future. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8)
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be
8
an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of
the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance at this time. I recognize her present expressed interest to resolve these
financial issues to restore her credit rating and obtain a security clearance. The
delinquent debts arose over several years both during and after her unemployment. She
has had a good salary over the past three years with her present employer and has
resolved the majority of the debts. She is now able to resolve the remaining two debts,
and will do so.  
Applicant was impressive in her testimony about her family, her employment, the
difficult years of medical problems, and her unemployment. She is now well-employed in
a firm that values her services. She is able to stay out of debt with her current budget.
The incident with drugs occurred over four years ago. She is sincere in her regret that it
happened. She has learned a valuable lesson and will never let it occur again. There is
no reason that she should not be granted a security clearance.
                          Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
9
                       Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is granted. 
CHARLES D. ABLARD  
Administrative Judge
