1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-03273
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA) on August 27,
2007. On May 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations
(Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1,
2006. 
Applicant submitted her answer to the SOR on June 4, 2008. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on August 19, 2008, and the hearing was held on September 10,
2008. At the hearing, six exhibits (GE 1 through 4, GE 6 and 7) were admitted in
evidence without objection to support the government’s case. GE 5 was marked for
identification (Tr. 22); the exhibit was not admitted in evidence because (1) it is
irrelevant to the allegations of the SOR, and (2) Applicant testified she has never been
2
to the state cited in GE 5 (Tr. 150). Applicant  testified and submitted four exhibits (AE
A-AE D). In the time allowed for Applicant to furnish additional documentation, she
submitted AE E through AE H. These exhibits contain partial payment receipts to
medical providers, and letters to creditors telling them she cannot pay the debt and/or to
discontinue contacting her about the debt. DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the
proceedings on September 19, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges 10 debts (nine delinquent debts and one judgment) totaling
$16,984.00. The debts converted to delinquent status between 2001 and December
2007. Applicant admitted subparagraphs 1.f., 1.i., and 1.k. She denied the other seven
debts. Her denials of the remaining debts resulted from not recognizing the accounts
after they were sold to collection agencies with different names. During the hearing, she
acknowledged the other listed accounts are her responsibility. 
Applicant is 62 years old. Her second marriage ended in divorce in June 1984.
She has three sons, 46, 44, and 38 years of age. She seeks a security clearance.
Applicant’s financial troubles began in December 1997 when she lost her job
after a serious car accident left her with broken arms and legs. Surgery, including the
insertion of metal plates and screws, was required to facilitate proper healing.
Applicant’s orthopedic surgeon advised her to file for disability because arthritis would
eventually demobilize her. Over the next two or three years, she struggled to find a job
that would allow her to work in a seated position. She found employment in early 2000
allowing her to work in a seated position, but was terminated when the business was
sold in February 2002. Applicant began receiving Social Security Disability payments in
March 2003 (Tr. 95). She was unable to find employment until she was hired at her
present job in September 2007. 
Between February 2002 and September 2007, she lived with different relatives
until she moved into her own apartment some time in 2003. Currently, after subtracting
all her expenses from her monthly disability check of $1,109.00, she has a negative
monthly remainder of approximately $619.00 (Tr. 143). Applicant has received
assistance from her sons and her sister to help her pay her expenses. 
When Applicant discovered she needed additional surgery in early 2008 to
remove the metal plate and screws from her leg, she stated, “I started looking for a job
so I could get some additional insurance to help pay for the surgery I needed. I found
this job that hires disable[d] senior citizens at [current employer]. This job was
terminated in April 2008 (AE A).” Applicant asserts that a reasonable accommodation
be made under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) to permit her to continue her
employment with her current employer (AE B). 
3
The head of human resources, who also serves as facility security officer (FSO)
for the employer, explained that 75% of the company’s employees have disability issues
(Tr. 37). She initiated the background security check on Applicant, and also participated
in Applicant’s job interview before she was hired in September 2007 to work part-time
(Tr. 30). The FSO has had no complaints about Applicant’s work (Tr. 31). While the
FSO testified Applicant has been employed since September 2007, there is no evidence
in the record indicating where Applicant was employed or what her job duties were
between September 2007 and March 2008. 
Applicant’s second witness supervised Applicant from March to May 2008.
Applicant had to stop work in May 2008 when her interim security clearance was
rescinded. She also underwent additional surgery to remove the metal plate and screws
from her leg, recommends her for a position of trust based on the excellent rapport she
has developed at her job as a receptionist at the crime lab (Tr. 47). Applicant’s
exemplary job performance is the primary reason her supervisor provided testimonial
support for her (Tr. 55). 
Regarding the debts listed in the SOR, Applicant presented no evidence of
repayment. She provided four receipts of partial payments on medical accounts, but it is
impossible to determine whether the payments apply to either of the two listed medical
accounts (subparagraphs 1.f. and 1.g.) or other unlisted medical debts. She believes
the past due account ($10,522.00) in subparagraph 1.h. is a credit card she had at the
time of her auto accident in December 1997. The state lien of $726.00 (subparagraph
1.h.) was imposed in October 2007 (GE 4) because Applicant did not pay taxes on the
unemployment compensation she received over the years. She did not know she had to
pay taxes on unemployment benefits she received (Tr. 74).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt  concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
4
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
The credit bureau reports reflect that since 2001 Applicant has accumulated 10
delinquent accounts (nine delinquent debts and one judgment) totaling almost
$17,000.00. FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and FC DC 19.c. (a history not meeting financial obligations) apply based on the
age of the debts, and the fact they have not been paid. 
The record reflects Applicant was involved in a very serious automobile accident
in December 1997. As a result of her injuries, she could no longer work standing for any
lengthy period of time. She encountered periods of unemployment until she found a job
in early 2000. She lost that job in February 2002, and was unemployed until she found
employment with her current employer in September 2007. Since February 2002,
5
Applicant has been receiving unemployment benefits, financial and shelter help from
her relatives and Social Security Disability. 
There are four mitigating conditions (MC) that have potential application to this
case. FC mitigating condition (MC) 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment) cannot
be applied as Applicant still owes the debts even though the account in subparagraph
1.h. should probably be removed by the limitations statutes defining the period of time a
creditor has to recover on a delinquent credit card debt. Applicant ’s debts are likely to
persist, however, even if the subparagraph 1.h. account were removed for time
limitation purposes. 
FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control and individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies based on the serious car accident in December 1997, and employment
problems Applicant encountered since then because of her disability. 
Conversely, neither FC MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) nor FC MC 20.d. (the individual initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) apply. There is no indication
Applicant has her financial problems under control. Though she has made partial
payments on some medical accounts, she has not addressed any of the SOR accounts,
not even the medical account for $10.00. Applicant has not met her burden of
persuasion under the FC guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s
life, and a careful consideration of nine variables that comprise whole person model:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation and recurrence. ¶ 2, p.18 of
the Directive.
I have considered the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all facts
and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the general factors of the whole
person model. It is clear Applicant suffered serious injuries in her car accident in
December 1997 that she has not fully recovered from. Since then, she has encountered
6
problems finding a job. While there is testimony she began working at her current
employer in September 2007, her supervisor provided the only direct knowledge of her
employment. I am not minimizing the financial impact of the car accident and
subsequent periods of unemployment. I have concluded however, that the character
accolades from her supervisor addressing Applicant’s two months of employment from
March to May 2008 do not outweigh her continuing financial problems. Having
considered this case under the general factors of the whole person concept, Applicant’s
access for classified information is denied. 
Applicant raises an issue that warrants discussion. First, her contention that a
reasonable accommodation be made under ADA for her disability so she can continue
her employment has been addressed by the DOHA Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 99-
0068 (November 30, 1999). The federal government is excluded from ADA coverage by
42 USC 1211(5)(B) (Id. at 5). Second, my adverse decision is not based on Applicant’s
disability, but on her continuing financial problems and insufficient track record of job
performance and financial responsibility. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
