                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02301
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On August 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 20, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 23, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing
on November 14, 2008.  A hearing was held on November 14, 2008, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant's security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of two exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits.
2
The transcript (R.T.) was received on November 24, 2008.  Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is
granted.
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to consider retention
of his Mexican passport and citizenship and document his surrender or destruction of
his passport and relinquishing of his Mexican citizenship should he make the decision to
do so (R.T., at 49-50).  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 10 days to
November 26, 2008 to supplement the record. The Government was afforded three
days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a
faxed cover letter confirming his decision to surrender his Mexican passport,
documented receipt of his surrendered Mexican passport by his employer’s facility
security officer (FSO), and a letter confirming his ownership of a small home in Mexico
and inheritance expectancy, together with his expressing willingness to consider
renouncing his Mexican citizenship.  Department counsel did not object to these post-
hearing submissions. Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits were admitted and considered as
exhibits A through C.   
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, Applicant is alleged to (a) be a dual citizen of the U.S. and
Mexico, (b) accept and maintain Mexican citizenship, (c) possess a valid Mexican
passport that does not expire till 2015, (d) be unwilling to surrender or destroy his
Mexican passport, and (d) own a condominium in Mexico, including the land on which it
is situated.     
                                                                           
For his answer, Applicant admitted two of the allegations in the SOR with
explanations (i.e., his dual citizenship status, his Mexican passport possession, and his
condominium ownership). He denied the remaining three allegations.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted
as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
 
Applicant's background
Applicant was born in the U.S. to parents of Mexican citizenship.  His mother at
the time had a resident alien card that enabled her to live and work in the U.S. (see ex.
4).  Not working or living in the U.S. at the time of Applicant’s birth, she traveled to the
U.S. in 1970 for Applicant’s birth to ensure he would be a U.S. citizen (R.T., at 39-40).
Shortly after Applicant was born, he and his mother returned to Mexico to live (see exs.
2 and 4; R.T., at 39-40). 
3
As a primary student in Mexico, Applicant encountered early problems with his
enrollment because of his U.S. citizenship.  To resolve the concerns of Mexican school
authorities, Applicant’s father applied for Mexican citizenship in behalf of Applicant, who
at the time was just13 years of age (see ex. C).  Through his father’s efforts, Applicant
was naturalized as a Mexican citizen in 1983, and issued a Mexican passport in about
1985 at the age of 15 (ex. 4; R.T., at 42).  
When Applicant reached the age of 16 (in 1986), he went to live with his
grandmother in the U.S., while he finished his schooling across the border in Mexico
(see exs. 2 and 4; R.T., at 27).  After finishing his secondary education, he enrolled in a
U.S. university (R.T., at 40). He has maintained his Mexican citizenship to date (R.T., at
41).  His Mexican passport was renewed in 1995, and again in 2005 (R.T., at 28); it is
not due to expire until 2015.  
Applicant is unmarried and has no children (ex. 1). He has a brother and sister
(see ex. 1).  Both Applicant and his sister were given green cards in 1978 by the INS,
and Applicant and his sister were later naturalized as U.S. citizens, along with their
brother (see exs. 1 and 4).  Why Applicant’s U.S. citizenship by birth in the U.S. was not
recognized by the INS and U.S. State Department is not explained.
By virtue of his birth to parents of Mexican citizenship in the U.S. and subsequent
naturalization as a Mexican citizen, Applicant is a dual citizen of Mexico and the U.S.
His mother passed away in November 2005 (see ex. 2).  His father, his brother, and his
brother’s wife all reside in Mexico.  Applicant stays in touch with his father and brother
on a regular basis (see ex. 2).   By contrast, his sister resides in the U.S.
 While Applicant remains committed to the U.S. and its valued principles, he has
been reluctant to renounce his Mexican citizenship (ex. 2).  By giving up his Mexican
citizenship, he fears he would have to dispose of the Mexican condominium he
purchased in 2002, and risk the forfeiture of his inheritance of his parent’s home in
Mexico after his father passes away (ex. 2; R.T., at 48-49).  This is something he has
not wanted to do.  Applicant regularly visits his family in Mexico and stays in his
Mexican condominium on these visits.  
Applicant has never been followed (to his knowledge) on his visits to Mexico,
should such a situation occur, he would definitely report it to his supervisor, FSO, and
the FBI (see ex. 2, at 4).  No members of his family have been subjected to coercion or
duress by Mexican authorities (see ex. 2).  
Applicant has never used his Mexican passport to travel to Mexico, and uses it
strictly for identification purposes when asked by Mexican authorities (R.T.,at 28, 43).
His assurances are corroborated by his documented Mexican passport (see ex. 3).
Previously, Applicant indicated that he did not want to surrender his Mexican passport
(not due to expire until 2015).  After an opportunity to reconsider his decision, he
indicated at hearing a willingness to surrender his Mexican passport (R.T., at 28-33)
and consider renouncing his Mexican citizenship.  Afforded an opportunity to surrender
4
his Mexican passport after the hearing, he documents its surrender to his employer’s
FSO (exs. A and B).  He also provided post-hearing documentation of his willingness to
consider renouncing his Mexican citizenship (see ex. C).
Applicant has no business or financial interest in Mexico besides his
condominium  and inheritance expectancy and has no plans to invest in the country.  He
has never voted in a Mexican election or served in Mexico’ military.  He has no debts or
obligations to Mexico or any foreign country.  And he has accepted no educational,
medical, or other economic or political fiscal benefits from Mexico (save for his primary
school training and home ownership) that required his use of his Mexican citizenship.
He does expect to inherit his parent’s residence in Mexico, along with his brother and
sister, when his father passes away (R.T., at 46).  He values this property at
somewhere between $150,000 and $200,000 (R.T., at 27, 44-45).  He assures his
allegiance lies with the U.S., and he would never do anything to hurt U.S. security
interests (R.T., at 47-48).    
Country Status of Mexico
         Mexico is the most populous Spanish-speaking country in the world, and a country
that has made considerable strides in improving access to education and literacy rates
over the past few decades (see ex. 5: Background Note: Mexico, U.S. Department of
State, at 2 (April 2008)).  Mexico is a constitutional democracy that completed a number
of important reforms in its freedom of information laws and criminal justice system under
current President Felipe Calderon (id, at 4).  Mexico’s oil and gas interests are operated
by a state-owned constitutionally established monopoly (Pemex), and Mexico is a
principal supplier of both crude oil and gas to the U.S.  Its relations with the U.S. are as
important as they are complex.  A stable, democratic, and economically prosperous
Mexico is fundamental to U.S. political, economic and security interests.  Illustrative of
the important state-to-state trade relations between these two neighbours is their
NAFTA  partnership.  Illustrative of the reinforcement of their strategic ties is the
Security and Prosperity Partnership, they forged (along with Canada) in 2005 (see id.,
at 6).
To be sure, travel warnings are in place for U.S. citizens travelling in Mexico.
Drug-related wars between criminal organizations seeking control of the major narcotics
trade that continues to rage along the U.S.-Mexico border have created heightened
risks for U.S. citizens residing or travelling in Mexico (see Travel Alert, Mexico, U.S.
Department of State, at 2 (April 2008)).  Despite stepped up efforts by the Mexican
government to combat border violence with deployed military troops in various border
regions, U.S. citizens are still advised to exercise caution when residing or travelling in
unfamiliar areas of Mexico (id., at 2).
Policies 
                                                                                                                                                           
      The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
5
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying" (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth
in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended
to assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense
decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
See Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 9.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
6
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis 
Applicant presents as a U.S. citizen by birth who became a naturalized citizen of
Mexico through his father, who had Mexican citizenship by birth.  Aside from receiving
primary school benefits, owning a condominium and inheritance expectancy, and
possessing a Mexican passport (which he uses for identification purposes only when
traveling to Mexico for family visits), Applicant has never exercised any active indicia of
dual citizenship with Mexico. Claiming his principal affections lie with the U.S., he,
nonetheless, retained his Mexican passport and citizenship, his Mexican condominium
ownership, and his inheritance expectancy.
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations over acts indicating a preference or not for the interests of the
foreign country over the interests of the U.S.  The issues, as such, raise concerns over
Applicant's  preference for a foreign country over the U.S.
By virtue of his naturalized citizenship in Mexico through his father of Mexican
birth and citizenship, Applicant was endowed with Mexican citizenship, which could be
renounced by his expressed intention or actions.  This, Applicant  has never done, out
of concern he would be required to dispose of his Mexican condominium and risk the
forfeiture of his inheritance expectancy.  He does say that he is currently willing to
consider renouncing his Mexican citizenship. 
Since becoming a naturalized Mexican citizen as a young minor, Applicant has
taken no actions and exercised no Mexican privileges that can be fairly characterized as
active indicia of dual citizenship, save for (a) his receipt of primary schooling in Mexico,
(b) his limited use of his Mexican passport for identification purposes when entering and
exiting Mexico, (c) his ownership of his Mexican condominium, and(d) his retention of
an inheritance expectancy.  He has not voted in Mexican elections or served in the
Mexican military.  He has accepted no preferential educational, medical or other
benefits from Mexico since becoming a naturalized Mexican citizen (save for his primary
schooling, passport use, home ownership, and inheritance expectancy).  Nor has he
ever performed or attempted to perform duties, or otherwise acted so as to serve the
interests of Mexico in preference to the interests of the U.S. since becoming a Mexican
citizen.
Because Applicant received primary schooling benefits in Mexico, possessed and
used his Mexican passport and owns a Mexican condominium in Mexico, the
Government may apply disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶ 9, “exercise of any
right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or
through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
7
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign
country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social
welfare, or  other  such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship
requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business
interests  in  another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;
(7) voting in a foreign election."  
However, Applicant’s residence time in Mexico has been limited to his early
childhood years when he was subject to his parents’ guidance and control, and his brief
family trips since he returned to the U.S. to permanently reside in 1986.  He claims no
intention to make Mexico his permanent residence.  So, at least as to any privileges he
may have enjoyed in attending Mexican primary schools as a minor under his parent’s
guidance and control, he may take some advantage of MC ¶ 11 (c), “exercise of the
rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before the individual
became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.”
By relinquishing his Mexican passport, and expressing his willingness to
renounce his Mexican citizenship, Applicant has complied with the mitigation
requirements of MC ¶ 11 (e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” of AG ¶ 18.  And while his
surrendering his Mexican passport to his FSO does not automatically mitigate any past
use of the passport to enter and exit Mexico, his recited limited use of the passport is
insufficient by itself to demonstrate Applicant’s preference for Mexico over the U.S.
Moreover, since Applicant has also expressed his willingness to consider renouncing his
Mexican citizenship, he may invoke the mitigation benefits of MC ¶ 11 (b), “the
individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship” as well.
Failure to satisfy a mitigating condition may, of course, be taken into account
when assessing an applicant's overall claim of extenuation, mitigation, or changed
circumstances, but may not be turned into a disqualifying condition.  See ISCR Case
No. 01-02270 (Appeal Bd. Aug. 29, 2003).  That Applicant may wish to keep his
Mexican citizenship out of concern for protecting his condominium ownership and
inheritance expectancy in the country is not sufficient reason by itself to preclude him
from mitigating security concerns over his holding dual citizenship and  property
interests in Mexico. 
8
Whole person precepts favor Applicant's preference for the U.S. over Mexico.
He is a U.S. citizen by birth and has always demonstrated his loyalty for the U.S.  His
principal financial interests are situated in the U.S.  And his brief trips to Mexico have
been devoted to his interest in seeing his family on periodic visits.    
Overall, Applicant persuades that his preference is with the U.S.  He satisfies his
proof burden in several ways: demonstrated his lack of any exercise of any privileges
associated with his Mexican citizenship, save for his receipt of primary schooling in
Mexico, his possession and limited use of his Mexican passport, his ownership of his
condominium in Mexico, and his retention of a Mexican inheritance expectancy.
Applicant absolves himself of foreign preference concerns and carries his evidentiary
burden on the presented issue of whether his preference lies with his native country
(U.S.) or the country (Mexico) where he was naturalized as a minor through his father’s
Mexican citizenship.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f of Guideline C.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in 2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of
Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a : FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.f: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
9
