                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-04015 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Murphy, Delaney, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F (Financial Considerations) security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On August 14, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
 
1  Item 5. 
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On September 18, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 9, 2008, was provided to 
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.3 The case was assigned to me on December 12, 
2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his responses to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c. – 1.d., 1.f. – 
1.h., and 1.j. – 1.l. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e., 1.i., and 1.m. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old self-employed, home-based contractor for a nationwide 
trucking company that delivers goods for the Government.4 The FORM contains no 
information regarding his educational background. He has been married since August 
2002, and has no dependents. He did not serve in the military. He disclosed no police 
record; no use of illegal drugs in the last seven years; and no alcohol-related problems, 
counseling or treatment in the last seven years. Applicant has never been granted a 
security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial problems and 
included the review of his November 2007 and August 2008 credit reports.5 Additionally, 
it considered Applicant’s answer to DOHA interrogatories,6  which included his financial 
statement. 
 
Applicant has delinquent SOR debts approximating $16,000. In addition to his 
Admissions to his Answer to the SOR, the debts are independently supported by 
 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3 The DOHA transmittal letter is dated October 9, 2009. Applicant signed the receipt for the 
DOHA transmittal letter on October 15, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 
30 days after receipt of the FORM to submit information. 
 
4  Item 5 (e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
5 Items 7 and 8. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
Applicant’s eQIP, and his November 2007 and August 2008 credit reports.7 As noted 
above, Applicant’s Answer denied he owes the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e. and 
1.i.; however, he has provided no evidence to prove or support his assertions. Even if 
Applicant’s assertions are true, the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR to which he 
admits are $12,700. 
 
The DOHA interrogatories asked Applicant (in part) to explain and/or document 
the status of 12 delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.m. Applicant stated in 
his response, “As for the question list on our creditors, none of those have been paid 
and no monthly payments have been arranged at this time.”8 
 
Applicant’s response to the FORM failed to address any of his delinquent debts. 
He failed to provide any information as to how he acquired the debts, why they became 
delinquent, what efforts he took, if any, to resolve his debts, and what measures he has 
taken to avoid similar financial problems in the future. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
7 Items 7 and 8. 
 
8 Items 6. 
  
 
4 
 
 
                                           
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”9 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).10 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
9 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
10 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his answers to 
DOHA interrogatories, and his SOR response.  
 
Applicant has submitted no documentation to show he has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e., and l.i., that he has 
attempted to contact those or other creditors to settle or resolve the debts alleged in the 
SOR, or that he is receiving counseling or has ever received financial counseling to 
assist him with his financial difficulties.  
 
Applicant also has not produced convincing evidence showing that he acted 
responsibly or prudently in managing his financial affairs over several years, and it is 
clear from the record evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are not recent, are 
not isolated, and appear likely to be a continuing concern in the future.  
 
Applicant admitted nine of twelve debts alleged and those nine debts 
approximate $12,700. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Considering the record as a whole, I conclude his 12 SOR debts, 
totaling about $16,000 are still valid, delinquent debts, and that Applicant is responsible 
for them.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,11 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s sparse favorable information fails to establish 
the applicability of any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he has dealt responsibly with his 
financial obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR. Based on his security 
clearance application, Applicant has held his present job as a contractor since January 
2006.  
 
Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that 
he has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that he has taken control 
of his financial situation. Based on the available evidence, his financial problems are 
recent, not isolated, and are likely to be a concern in the future. He has not carried his 
burden of proving his financial responsibility. His overall financial behavior casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG  ¶ 2(c).   
 
11  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s record of employment doing Government contract weighs in his favor.  
Aside from his delinquent debts (which is a civil, non-criminal issue), he is a law-abiding 
citizen. These factors show some responsibility and mitigation.   
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. He has 
a significant history of delinquent debt that has been ongoing. Applicant has submitted 
no documentation to show he has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
debts, that he has attempted to contact those or other creditors to settle or resolve 
debts alleged in the SOR, or that he is receiving or has ever received financial 
counseling to assist him with his financial difficulties. Applicant has not produced 
convincing evidence showing that he has acted responsibly or prudently in managing 
his financial affairs over several years, and it is clear from the record that Applicant’s 
financial problems are not recent isolated, and appear likely to be a continuing concern 
in the future. Accordingly, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns caused by 
the financial considerations in his case. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
    Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.m.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
