1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03781
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: B. Daniel Lynch, Esquire
December 1, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 3,
2006. On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B and C
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on July 23, 2008, and requested
a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on August
11, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 16, 2008, and I convened
the hearing as scheduled on October 20, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits 1
through 3, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf
and through counsel, he also submitted Exhibits A through E, which were admitted
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on October 30, 2008.
2
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to the country of Iran. The request and the attached documents
were admitted into evidence as Exhibit 3. Applicant’s counsel also submitted a request
that I take administrative notice (Exhibit D). The facts administratively noticed are set
out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.i., with
explanations, with the exception of 1.e., which he denied. He also admitted 2.a. through
2.d. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, the testimony of Applicant, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 62 years old and was born in Iran in 1946. He moved to the United
States in 1969. He moved back to Iran from 1975 to 1979, and he has lived in the U.S.
since 1979.  He became a naturalized United States citizen in 1994.  Applicant received
a Master of Science degree in 1971, and a Ph.D. degree in 1975 from a United States
university. He also received his Bachelor’s Degree from a U.S. university in Iran.
Applicant has received 32 United States patents for projects that he has worked on in
this country. 
Applicant is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence) 
1.a. Applicant's stepfather is a citizen and resident of Iran. Applicant testified that
his stepfather and he are very close with a very strong bond, as his biological father
died when he was very young, and his stepfather came into his life when Applicant was
eight.  Applicant  described him as more like a father than a stepfather. His stepfather is
long retired, but previously he had been a businessman, and before the revolution in
Iran, he was a postal clerk.  
1.b. Applicant's sister is a citizen and resident of Iran. She is now retired, but she
had been a school teacher. Her husband is a veterinarian. Applicant’s relationship with
his sister as close. 
1.c. Applicant's half-sister is a citizen of Iran, residing in Germany. She is a
housewife.
3
1.d. Applicant's other half-sister is a citizen and resident of Iran. She is also now
retired, but she had been a school teacher. Her husband owns a store in Iran. Applicant
also has strong bonds of affection to his half sisters. 
1.e. Applicant's father-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iran. Applicant testified
that his father-in-law is now deceased. 
1.f. Applicant's sister-in-law is a dual citizen of Iran and Canada, residing in
Canada. 
1.g. Applicant's brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iran. 
1.h. Applicant's wife is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States, residing in the
United States. She works as a nurse.
1.i. Applicant's daughter and two sons are dual citizens of Iran and the United
States, residing in the United States. They are dual citizens, because both of their
parents are dual citizens. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference) 
1.a. After Applicant became a United States citizen on October 7, 1994, he
renewed his Iranian passport, on more than one occasion, the most recent being
February 5, 2007. He testified that he has used his Iranian passport to enter and exit
Iran, because he is not sure what would happen if he used his U.S. passport. 
1.b. Applicant currently possesses an Iranian passport that is not scheduled to
expire until February 5, 2012. He plans to retain his Iranian passport until such time in
the future when he does not feel that he needs it any longer. 
1.c. Applicant has used his Iranian passport, rather than a United States
passport,  to travel to Iran on more than one occasion, after he became a United States
citizen. Applicant has traveled to Iran in 1998, 1999, three times in 2003, three times in
2006, and once in 2008. For all these trips he used his Iranian passport (Exhibit 2).
Applicant’s wife and children also have current Iranian passports that they have used to
enter and exit Iran. 
1.d. After Applicant became a United States citizen on October 7, 1994, he voted
in the 1997 Iranian presidential election. Applicant testified that he voted because the
person running for president was more of a moderate, and Applicant believed it would
be good for the world if he were elected. He has not voted in any other Iranian election. 
Applicant also testified that at this time he has no intention to renounce his
Iranian citizenship. When his stepfather is deceased he may then consider renouncing
his citizenship and revoking his Iranian passport, but not before then. 
4
Applicant estimated that his net value in the United States is approximately $1
million. He submitted four letters of recommendation that described Applicant in very
positive terms (Exhibit A).  He also submitted many impressive awards, degrees and
certificates that have been received by Applicant (Exhibit C).
Current Status of Iran
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Iran. Currently, Iran is
considered one of the most dangerous adversaries to the interests of the United States.
The U.S. has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since April 7, 1980, following the
November 1979 Iranian student occupation of the American Embassy in Tehran and the
hostage taking of 52 Americans, which was supported by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini,
Iran’s leader at the time.
The United States Government’s concerns with Iran’s policies include, but are
not limited to the following: (1) its clandestine efforts to acquire nuclear weapons of
mass destruction, (2) its sponsorship of international terrorism, (3) its intervention into
the internal affairs of Iraq, (4) its aggressive efforts to undermine the Middle East peace
process, and (5) its human rights violation against its own people. As a result of these
concerns, the U.S. prohibits most trade with Iran.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
5
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying (DC). Those that could be applicable in this case include the following: (a)
contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if
that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion. Applicant’s relatives, who are citizens and residents of Iran, a
country whose interest is inimical to the United States, and who continue to have, by his
6
own admission, very close bonds to Applicant, make DC (a) and (d) concerns to the
Government.
I do not find that any MC is applicable to this Applicant and this case. I therefore,
conclude Guideline B against Applicant.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
Applicant’s application, receipt and multiple use of an Iranian passport, and his
voting in an Iranian election after becoming a U.S. citizen, raises foreign preference
concerns under Disqualifying Condition DC 10 (a), the exercise of the privilege of
foreign citizenship.
Since Applicant continues to maintain his Iranian passport, which he has used
often in the past and plans to potentially use in the future, and he is not willing to
renounce his Iranian citizenship to the proper Iranian authorities, I do not find that any
MC under this guideline applies to this case. After considering all of the evidence of
record on Guideline C, I conclude that the disqualifying evidence substantially
outweighs the mitigating evidence. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply, I find that the record evidence
leaves me significant questions and  doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for
a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has failed to mitigated the security concerns. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. through 1.i.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. through 2.d.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
