1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of:                                              )
       )
       ) ISCR Case No. 08-04676 
                 )
       )
Applicant for Security Clearance                    )
                        Appearances
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                        ________________
                        Decision
                       ________________
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude
that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial
Considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted.
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic Questionnaire
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on October 25, 2007. After reviewing the results of the
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply
to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1,
2006.
 Applicant attached the following eight documents to his Answer: 1: 1998 Chapter 7 Bankruptcy Petition; 2:3
IRS Release of Levy, 2003; 3: State A child support summary statement; 4: State B child support payment
documents; 5: power company debt document; 6: Ford Motor Company debt document; 7: medical debt
document; 8: AT&T debt document.
2
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly1
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
On July 10, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which
specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).   In his2
Answer to the SOR,  signed and notarized on August 27, 2008, Applicant admitted to the3
allegation at ¶1.a. and denied the remaining allegations at ¶¶1.b. through 1.l. He also
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 23, 2008, and the case
was assigned to me the following day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 22,
2008 and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 13, 2008.
During the hearing, the government offered five exhibits, marked as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, and
offered 22 exhibits as well as the testimony of one witness. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) were
marked as A through U, and admitted without objection. I held the record open to allow
Applicant to submit additional documentation. Department Counsel forwarded without
objection Applicant’s timely submission of three additional pages to be added to AE G, and
a two-page document related to allegation 1.l. I admitted the additional document as AE V.
DOHA received the transcript on November 21, 2008, and the record closed on that day.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admission to allegation 1.a. is admitted as fact. After a thorough review
of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of Reasons, and the record
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant, 42 years old, graduated high school and completed several college
courses (Tr. 4-5). He married for the first time in 1992 and divorced in 1997. He has two
children from his first marriage, a son 14 years old and a daughter 13 years old (GE 1). Both
children live with their mother in State B. He has been paying child support since 1999
 Applicant’s child support is paid to State A Division of Child Support Enforcement, which then transfers the4
funds to State B, where Applicant’s children reside.
3
(Answer  document 4). Applicant married his current wife in 1997, and they live in State A.
His supervisor characterizes Applicant as an ethical person who car-pools to work and
exhibits no indication of living an exorbitant lifestyle (Tr. 14-15).
Applicant was employed as an engineer for defense contractors since 1999, except
for one six-month period of unemployment in 2005 (GE 1). His annual income over the past
eight years has fluctuated. In 2000 and 2001, he earned more than $200,000 (AE D). Since
then, his income has decreased to $149,000 in 2003, and $119,000 in 2004. In 2005, when
he was unemployed, his gross income was $37,486. The following year, it increased to
$87,000, and in 2007, his gross income was $104,390 (AE H).As of August 2008, Applicant
earns $8,692 per month. He has owned a rental property for the past four years, which
returns $1,250 in rental income. These two income sources result in a monthly gross
income of $9,942; after expenses, his net monthly remainder is $2,471. His annual income
for 2008 will be approximately $119,000 (AE Q; U).
The Statement of Reasons alleges eleven debts. Applicant provided documents
showing that his 1998 bankruptcy (allegation 1.a.) was discharged (AE A; Answer document
1). His exhibits showed the current status of the alleged debts as follows:
• Child support and arrearages: debt to State A Division of Child
Support Enforcement (allegations 1.c. and 1.d.) and State B
Division of Support Enforcement  (allegation 1.e.): Applicant has4
been paying on his support and arrearages since 1999. His debt
increased significantly in 2005, when his obligation was re-
assessed for the three previous years and $27,700 was added in
arrearages. As of July 2008, he had reduced this arrearage to
$10,871. He paid his child support obligation during his
unemployment of January to June 2005 (AE I, J, K; Answer
documents 2 and 4); 
• power company debt (allegation 1.f.): Paid (AE L; Answer
document 5);
• oil company debt (allegation 1.g.): As of September 2008,
Applicant owes $1,228; he has made two payments under his
payment plan of $100 per month (AE P; Answer document 5);
• Ford Motor Company (allegation 1.h.): As of November 2008, he
has made nine payments (including one of $4,253) for a total of
$5,055 (AE M; Answer document 6);
4
• credit union debt (allegation 1.i.): the debt was discharged in 1998
bankruptcy (AE A; Answer document 1);
• medical debt (allegation 1.j.): Paid (AE N; Answer document 7);
• Palisades/AT&T (allegation 1.k.): Applicant disputes the debt and
has informed the attorney who is handling collection (AE O; Answer
document 8);
• CBCS (allegation 1.l.): Paid (AE V).
As to the federal tax lien (allegation 1.b.), the record evidence supports the following.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) informed Applicant in March 2003 that a tax levy on his
salary had been released (Answer document 2). In May of the same year, the IRS
recalculated Applicant’s 2000 tax return and determined that he had underpaid his taxes
and that the underpayment, along with penalties and interest, amounted to $28,141. In
addition, the IRS found that he had made an error in his 2001 return and owed an additional
$16,357 for that tax year (AE B). The two errors resulted in a debt of $44,498. Applicant
proposed a payment plan to the IRS in September 2003. The plan called for $1,000 per
month to be garnished from Applicant’s salary and future refunds to be applied to his tax
debt (AE G). Applicant testified that he paid approximately $13,000 toward the debts
through garnishment, and that he had approximately $17,000 in tax refunds (Tr. 43; 68).
In September 2004, Applicant informed the IRS that he was about to be laid off from
his job. In response, the IRS issued a Notice of Federal Tax Lien showing that Applicant
owed $40,733.47 for tax years 2000 and 2001  (Tr. 37; AE F). Applicant’s tax returns for
2002 through 2007 indicate he was due refunds (AE D). The refunds for 2005 through 2007,
totaling $6,495, were credited toward his debt (AE H). 
After being unemployed for six months, Applicant found employment in July 2005,
and tried to re-establish the payment plan. However, the IRS determined that the 2000 and
2001 back taxes should be classified as “unrecoverable” because Applicant was earning
a lower salary than previously. Applicant’s salary has not been garnished since that time (Tr.
38).
Applicant contacted the IRS in July of this year, and then every week in September,
October and November to determine the current status of his account. Three days before
the hearing, he was informed that his account was still under review. The day before the
hearing, he visited the IRS personally, obtained a printout of his account (AE H) and was
told the debt for tax years 2000 and 2001 is still classified as “unrecoverable.” AE H
indicates that Applicant’s account shows a credit of $9,358 for tax year 2004, and
overpayments (refunds) that were transferred as follows: $2,954 for tax year 2005; $2,648
for tax year 2006; and $893 for tax year 2007. However, he was informed that some refunds
have been applied and some have not. Applicant has obtained the paperwork to enter into
a new agreement to deduct payments from his salary, which he hopes he will be able to do
within a few weeks following the hearing. (Tr. 39-42).
Directive. 6.3.
3 
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
5
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the  “whole person” factors5
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines.
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.
In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require
consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline
F (financial considerations).  
          A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether it
is clearly consistent with the national interest  for an Applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able to
prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then
falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable
doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.8
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
6
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-extended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage.
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.
Disqualifying condition AG ¶19a (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) applies.
Applicant’s income has fluctuated significantly over the past several years, and he was
unemployed for six months in 2005. His income decreased from more than $200,000 in
2001 to $37,500 in 2005. At the same time, his other expenses continued. His child
support was significantly increased in 2005, the year he was unemployed. All of these
factors contributed to Applicant’s inability to pay his debts. AG ¶19c (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) also applies. Applicant‘s credit bureau report shows that he
has had several substantial delinquencies over the past five years (GE 2), demonstrating
a history of failing to meet financial obligations. There is no evidence of other disqualifying
conditions such as frivolous spending, or debts related to alcoholism, gambling or
deceptive practices. 
The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate
security concerns. Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 20b, AG ¶ 20c and AG ¶ 20d apply. 
I find, and the government agrees (Tr. 105), that AG ¶ 20b applies (the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control [e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation], and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant’s
income declined steadily over several years, dropping almost 50 percent between 2002
and 2004. Following this decline, Applicant experienced six months of unemployment in
2005, earning only one-fifth of his 2002 income. When he found employment, his income
was not at the previous levels, and it has not returned to the level he was earning between
2000 and 2002. Despite these financial setbacks, he acted responsibly and continued
making his child support payments (AE I).
Applicant has paid the debts to the power company, and CBCS, as well as the
medical debt. He has established a payment plan for the debts to the oil company and
Ford Motor Company. Applicant disputes the debt to Palisades/AT&T and has informed
the debt collector. The judgments owed to the credit union were discharged in his
bankruptcy 10 years ago. Although he does have arrearages in his child support, his
payments have reduced the arrearages by approximately $17,000 in the past 3 years
(Answer document 3). The record evidence supports his contention that he has been
meeting this obligation consistently for almost 10 years, including the period when he was
unemployed. 
7
Applicant’s underpayment of federal income tax in 2000 and error on his 2001
return resulted in the IRS issuing a lien against him and assessing interest and penalties
in 2003. Soon after the lien was issued, Applicant contacted the IRS and established a
plan to pay $1,000 per month through deductions from his salary. Any tax refunds would
also be credited to pay his debt. However, following his unemployment in 2005, the IRS
would not re-institute the wage garnishment because of his significantly lower salary. It
appears that through the earlier payments, and the transferred refunds, he has paid more
than half of the IRS debt. Applicant credibly testified that he has persistently endeavored
to work with the IRS to resolve the situation. I find that all of these facts, and the record
evidence, support application of both AG ¶ 20c (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) and AG ¶ 20d (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) apply. 
Whole Person Analysis  
 
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8)
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance
must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the
guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances
surrounding this case. 
Applicant accrued significant debt over the past several years. His financial
problems resulted largely from a steady decline in his income, followed by unemployment.
However, he has paid several smaller debts, and set up payment plans for two larger
debts. Over more than nine years, he consistently met his obligation to support his
children. Throughout a difficult problem with the IRS, he acted with reason and maturity.
Applicant’s well-documented efforts demonstrate a sincere intent to meet his financial
obligations. A fair and common-sense assessment of the available information bearing
on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has satisfied the doubts about
his ability or willingness to protect the government’s interests.
8
Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s suitability
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the
security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1, Guideline F For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to classified
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
RITA C. O’BRIEN
Administrative Judge
