                                                              
 
 
1
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-05387 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F (Financial Considerations) security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 17, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On June 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
 
1  Item 3. 
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                            
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On July 16, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated August 30, 2008, was provided to him, and he 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.3 Applicant’s submitted a response to the FORM dated 
October 22, 2008. The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge on 
November 14, 2008, and due to caseload considerations was reassigned to me on 
November 18, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his responses to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. – 1.e., 1.g. – 1.i., 1.l., 1.q., 1.t. – 1.v., and stated he lacked sufficient information to 
admit or deny ¶¶ 1.f., 1.j. – 1.k., 1.m. – 1.p., 1.r. – 1.s. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old electronics technician, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since September 1996. He was awarded an associate’s degree in 
January 1997. Applicant has been legally separated from his wife since September 
1996. He has a seven-year-old daughter by another woman. Applicant seeks a security 
clearance in conjunction with his employment. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial problems and 
included the review of his June 2008 and January 2008 credit bureau reports.4  
 
Applicant’s response to the FORM failed to address his delinquent debts in a 
meaningful way. Although he discussed various attempts to address a number of debts, 
he failed to provide documentation regarding these efforts and any documented 
success in resolving his debts. He did state that “[n]one of this explanation is meant to 
be an excuse for the failure to meet all of my financial obligations but I am now fully 
committed to putting my financial life back in order beginning with my student loan and 
my income taxes.”5 He spoke of living pay check to pay check and planned to look for a 
 
 
3  The DOHA transmittal letter is dated September 4, 2008. Applicant signed the receipt for the 
DOHA transmittal letter on September 12, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after receipt of the FORM to submit information. 
 
4 Items 4 and 5. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
 
 
3
                                           
second job. His monthly take home pay reflected a total of $2,172, and total monthly 
bills of $2,384. This total did not reflect expenses for food, laundry, utilities, gasoline. 
These additional items bring his monthly debts/living expenses to an amount exceeding 
$2,600.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
6  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
 
 
4
                                                                                                                                            
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, and his SOR 
response.  
 
Department Counsel noted in his FORM that despite Applicant’s admission of the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. of a judgment of $1,353 in favor or a credit card company, his June 
2008 credit bureau report lists this judgment as satisfied.8 He further noted that 
Applicant admitted to the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.l. and 1.q., which are both identical. 
This creditor in these two allegations is a bank and the debt is in the approximate 
amount of $1,031. Applicant’s January 2008 credit bureau report lists this account as 
having been opened in September 2000 and as having a DLA of November 2002.9 
 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Item 5. 
 
 
5
                                                                                                                                            
Except as noted above, the Government established by Applicant’s admissions or 
evidence presented all of the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
Together, Applicant’s 20 delinquent debts excluding SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.q. total 
approximately $64,930. There is no documentary evidence of any payments or payment 
arrangements made on these accounts.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,10 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s sparse favorable information fails to raise the 
applicability of any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he has dealt responsibly with his 
financial obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR. Based on his security 
clearance application, Applicant has continuously worked for his current employer since 
1996. He presented no documentary evidence to show paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, payment plans, budgets, or financial assistance/counseling. 
Considering the record as a whole, I conclude the debts, except the satisfied debt and 
the duplicate debts, discussed above, are still valid and delinquent debts, and that 
Applicant is responsible for them.  
 
 
10  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
 
6
Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that 
he has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that he has taken control 
of his financial situation. Based on the available evidence, his financial problems are 
recent, not isolated, and are likely to be a concern in the future. He has not carried his 
burden of proving his financial responsibility. His overall financial behavior casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG  ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s employment record working for a government contractor weighs in his 
favor. There is no evidence of any security-related violations. Aside from his delinquent 
debts (which is a civil, non-criminal issue), he is a law-abiding citizen. These factors 
show some responsibility and mitigation.   
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. He has 
a significant history of delinquent debt going back to at least 2002. As an applicant for a 
security clearance, he was or should have been well aware of his financial 
responsibilities, and that his failure to be financially responsible would raise security 
clearance concerns.  
 
He provided little or no documented effort to resolve his delinquent debts prior to 
or after receipt of the SOR. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, 
and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he 
has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.d. Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.e.:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.p.: Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.q.:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.r – 1.v.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
