This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, dated January 1987, as amended
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-06808
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns that arise from his financial
irresponsibility, as demonstrated by the many debts he has allowed to remain delinquent
for a number of years, and his failure to disclose those debts, as required, in a security
clearance application he submitted in March 2008.  
On August 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 In addition to the SOR and Applicant’s response, the attachments to the FORM consist only of
2
transmittal documents, an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) and two credit
reports.   
 This information is taken from the e-QIP in the FORM. There is no explanation for the discrepant3
dates of employment. 
2
Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant submitted an undated answer to the SOR in
which he admitted all allegations and requested a clearance decision based on the written
record without a hearing.  
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September
29, 2008, that was mailed to Applicant the same day. Applicant was notified he had 30
days from receipt of the FORM to submit his objections thereto or any additional
information he wanted considered. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on
October 9, 2008. He did not respond to the FORM, object to anything contained in the
FORM, or submit any additional information he wanted considered within the time provided
to him. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits,  I make the following findings of fact:2
Applicant is 31 years old. He has been employed as a network technician by a
defense contractor since July 2005. He worked in the same location and under the same
supervisor but for a different employer from March 2005 until July 2006.  The Electronic3
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) Applicant submitted on March 11,
2008, lists periods of employment as either a network technician or network engineer with
three different employers between October 2000 and April 2003. It also lists periods of
unemployment from December 2001 until February 2002, and May 2003 until February
2005. There is no record evidence to explain why Applicant left his prior employments. 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor of arts degree in organizational communication
in May 1999. He is single and he did not list any dependents in the e-QIP he submitted.
The SOR lists 16 collection accounts owing in the total amount of $26,906. A review
of the credit reports contained in the FORM discloses that most of the delinquent accounts
arose from student loans, medical expenses, credit cards, cellular phone charges and
cable television charges. These accounts have been delinquent for varying periods of time
with some delinquencies dating as far back as 2002. Other than the periods of
unemployment, the last of which ended in February 2005, there is no record evidence to
explain why the accounts became delinquent. Further, there is no record evidence that
Applicant has made any effort to satisfy any of the accounts since he resumed employment
in March 2005. 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR that he deliberately falsified the e-
QIP he submitted in March 2008 by failing to disclose his many delinquent accounts in
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.4
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 5
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).6
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).
7
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.
8
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
11
3
response to questions asking if he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt or
if he had been over 180 days delinquent on any debts in the preceding seven years.  There
is no record evidence to explain or mitigate the falsification. 
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the Disqualifying
Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC) for each applicable guideline. Additionally,
each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon
the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the
factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence
of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct), with their respective DC and MC, are
most relevant in this case.   
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of4 5
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence ,6
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the7
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to8
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable9
clearance decision.10
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard11
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
 Id, at 531.12
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.13
4
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to12
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      13
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Applicant has 16 accounts, totalling almost $27,000, that have been submitted for
collection. There is no record evidence to indicate he has taken any steps to resolve any
of the delinquent accounts. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts; DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply. 
Applicant failed to provide any explanation why the accounts became delinquent.
The e-QIP he submitted lists two periods of unemployment and the credit reports in the
FORM disclose that a number of the delinquent accounts are related to medical expenses.
However, Applicant failed to provide any information as to what, if any, impact those factors
had on his ability to satisfy his creditors or remain current on his debts. Likewise, he did not
provide any information on what actions he may or may not have taken as a result of his
unemployment or medical issues to minimize the impact those episodes had on his ability
to remain financially secure. Most importantly, Applicant failed to provide any evidence or
explanation why he has not made any effort to resolve any of the accounts since he
resumed employment almost four years ago.  
I have considered Mitigating Condition (MC) 20(b): the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances and conclude it does not
apply because of Applicant’s failure to provide evidence that he acted responsibly while
either unemployed or ill. The record is devoid of any evidence on which to base application
of any other mitigating condition. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct is always a concern because conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
5
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Applicant failed to disclose his many delinquent accounts in the e-QIP he submitted
in March 2008 in response to questions asking if he had accounts that were more than 90
and 180 days past due. He admitted in his SOR response that he deliberately falsified the
e-QIP. He failed to provide any explanation or other mitigating evidence that in anyway
would mitigate the falsification. DC 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities applies. Again, the record is devoid of any evidence on which to
base application of any mitigating condition.   
 
The objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, including the very limited facts of record about Applicant, the
factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and
mitigating conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns caused by the
financial considerations that are present in this case and his personal conduct. He has not
overcome the case against him nor satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-p: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
HENRY LAZZARO
Administrative Judge
7
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

