                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-03797 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 20, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On May 27, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 11, 2008. He answered the 
SOR in writing on July 28, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. I received the case assignment on August 27, 2008.  DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on October 20, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 
6, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, without objection. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 17, 2007. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 28, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in the SOR, with explanations about his payment arrangements for each 
debt. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a 
security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, unmarried, and has no children.  He works as a 
computer technician for a defense contractor.  He started this job in December 2007. 
(Tr. 25-31; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has 12 delinquent debts totaling $23,606 listed in the SOR.  Of those 
12 debts, four listed are for private student loans he borrowed for his associate’s 
degree.  Those four loans total about $22,000 of the total debt listed in the SOR.  He 
also has 10 student loans not listed in the SOR which are consolidated federally insured 
loans and are in forbearance.  These student loans total about $16,000.  He used this 
money to obtain an associate’s degree in August 2004. He made three payments in 
2008 of between $89 and $100 on those loans, even though they are in forbearance.  
Seven of the debts listed in the SOR are medical expenses he incurred in the past five 
years.  The remaining debt for $20 (Paragraph 1.g) owed to a telephone company he 
paid. (Tr. 37-47, 51, 56, 58, 67; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 After his interview with a Government investigator, he took the list of delinquent 
debts to a consumer credit counseling service.  That service structured a budget and 
repayment plan for his delinquent debts for him.  He pays that service $75 monthly to 
repay all the debts listed in the SOR, which are his only delinquent debts, except for the 
four student loans listed (Paragraphs 1.h to 1.k), and the telephone bill in Paragraph 1.g 
in the SOR.  Applicant submitted proof of payment of his first three installment 
payments to the credit counseling service, from August 2008 to October 2008.  He 
made the November payment immediately before the hearing. The delinquent medical 
debts listed in Paragraphs 1.a to 1.f, and 1.l of the SOR total $1,801, and are being paid 
in the consumer counseling service installment plan used by Applicant. (Tr. 41, 42, 48-
55, 58, 59; Exhibits 1-5, B-D) 
 
 Applicant pays the four student loans listed in the SOR on a separate installment 
payment plan he negotiated.  He sends $300 monthly to the manager of those student 
loans.  He made the November 2008 payment two days before the hearing.  He 
submitted proof of payment of the June through October 2008 payments. (Tr. 43-45, 61, 
62; Exhibits 1-5, D) 
 
 Applicant has no credit cards, no tax debts, and is current on all his monthly 
financial obligations.  Over the past few years, he has learned to live inexpensively, 
 
3 
 
 
keep his monthly debts low, lives by himself in an apartment, and works at keeping his 
expenses under control.  He has a savings account and is trying to build a cash reserve 
fund for emergencies.  He lives near his mother, who is advising him on properly 
managing his money because she handles her personal finances in a responsible way 
and wants him to learn from her. (Tr. 62, 69-78) 
 
 Two of Applicant’s supervisors, and a co-worker, submitted favorable character 
statements on his behalf.  They regard him as hard-working, honest, trustworthy, 
conscientious, competent in the computer work, and courteous to the contractor’s 
customers. (Tr. 22; Exhibit E) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The Applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
 
4 
 
 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt and was unable to pay 
some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s 
financial worries arose about 2002 to 2004. He accumulated delinquent debt due to his 
inability to manage properly his finances. These circumstances are no longer extant 
because of the good paying job he has now, and his experiences with delinquent debt. 
The bulk of his debt is for student loans, which is a circumstance not likely to recur for 
the foreseeable future.  I find the behavior occurred under ordinary circumstances but 
that it is unlikely to recur, and it does not raise concerns about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence raises this potentially mitigating 
condition to have a slight application to this Applicant because his financial situation has 
changed in the past two years since graduating from technical school.  
 
5 
 
 
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ These factors are not 
present here. I find this potentially mitigating condition is not a consideration in this 
case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant received counseling, prepared a budget with the 
assistance of the credit counseling service, and is resolving all the delinquent debts by 
installment payment agreements through the credit counseling service or by his own 
agreements with the student loan lenders. He is now managing his money responsibly 
and prepared for future contingencies. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
 The remaining two mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20 do not apply.  Applicant does 
not dispute the legitimacy of any of the delinquent debts (AG ¶ 20 (e)).  Nor has any 
affluence occurred (AG ¶ 20 (f)). 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these problems first began, 
Applicant was a young man, and attending college. (See AG & 2(a)(4).) He 
 
6 
 
 
accumulated debt due to poor financial management practices, e.g., spending too much 
money, and borrowing for college without developing a plan to repay the loans after 
graduation. (See AG & 2(a)(2).) Since that time, Applicant has undergone significant 
behavioral changes. He found a good-paying job, and has been recognized by his 
supervisors for his dedication, integrity and trustworthiness. Most significantly, he has 
taken affirmative action to pay or resolve all of the delinquent debts raising security 
concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) He persuasively and credibly testified to his change in 
attitude and practice toward managing his personal finances, and brought documentary 
proof of his payments to the hearing. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his 
debts are paidBit is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness 
to hold a security clearance.  All of his delinquent debts are being paid in a responsible 
manner. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)   
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction 
through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required 
is that an applicant demonstrate that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge can 
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. 
Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  I conclude the “whole person” concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
