 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-03752 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application, on April 15, 2004. On 
September 4, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 29, 2008, and requested 
a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on October 19, 2008, and I received the case assignment on October 21, 
 
2 
 
2008. On October 31, 2008, I submitted a request to the hearing office to schedule 
this case to be heard on December 3, 2008. Delay in setting this case was due to 
schedule conflicts. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 12, 2008, 
scheduling the hearing for December 3, 2008. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. The Government submitted a List of Government Exhibits, 
Exhibit (Ex.) I and a Summary of Debts and Supporting Evidence, Ex. II. The Applicant 
submitted a binder, marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, containing numerous dividers, 
which was received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until December 12, 2008 to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
AE 1 through 15 without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 11, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.e., 1.g., and 1.k. He denied ¶¶ 1.d. and 
1.h. (stating it was the same debt as 1.a.), 1.f. (stating it was the same debt as 1.j.) 
and 1.c., 1.i., and 1.l. (stating they were paid in full). His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old test and evaluation engineer, who has worked for his 
defense contractor employer since June 2003. GE 1, Tr. 17. He currently holds a 
secret security clearance, which he held as a civilian employee since March 2002. Tr. 
19. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which is a condition of his employment. 
Tr. He previously held a clearance while he was in the U.S. Navy, discussed infra. Tr. 
18-20. 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1989. He estimates he has 
earned approximately 100 college credit hours. Tr. 17-18. He served in the Navy from 
August 1992 to July 2001. He was honorably discharged as an Operations Specialist 
First Class (Surface Warfare) (pay grade E-6), and served the majority of his naval 
service on sea duty. Tr. 20-23. Applicant was previously married from September 
1995 to June 2002. That marriage ended by divorce. Applicant and his former wife 
had one child born during that marriage, an eight-year-old son. Applicant’s former wife 
was granted custody of their son. Applicant remarried in March 2006, and he and his 
wife have a two-year-old son. GE1, Tr. 16-17. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his April 2004 SF-86, his July 2008 Response to DOHA 
Financial Interrogatory, and his June 2006 and March 2008 credit bureau reports 
(CBR). GE 1 – 4.  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 12 separate debts, which included two judgments, 
five collection accounts, and five charged off accounts for a total of $19,952. Excluding 
duplicate debts, the amount of indebtedness is $12,944. The following chart lists debts 
alleged, status, references, and comments as appropriate. 
 
SOR Debt Status Reference Comment 
1.a. Judgment filed 
in Mar. 2007  
$2,646 (credit 
card). 
Currently 
unresolved/unpaid.  
Attempting to settle. 
Paid $30 to 
“provoke” a reply 
from creditor. 
Response to SOR, 
Tr. 26-31, 35, AE A 
(TAB 4), AE 1, AE 
2, AE 3, AE 5, AE 
6, AE 9, AE 10, AE 
11, AE 14, AE II. 
Duplicate of SOR 
1.d. & 1.h. Made 
numerous attempts 
to contact creditor. 
Awaiting response. 
Debt increased due 
to interest and 
penalties. Efforts to 
resolve thoroughly 
documented. 
1.b. Judgment filed 
in Jan. 2004 
$1,651. 
Currently 
unresolved/unpaid. 
Attempting to settle. 
Paid $30 to 
creditor. 
Response to SOR, 
Tr. 31-33, 36, AE A, 
AE 1, AE 2, AE 3, 
AE 4, AE 9, AE 10, 
AE 11, AE 15, AE 
II. 
Duplicate of SOR 
1.f., 1.g. & 1.j. 
Made numerous 
attempts to contact 
creditor. Awaiting 
response. Debt 
increased due to 
interest and 
penalties. Efforts to 
resolve thoroughly 
documented. 
1.c. Collection 
account $238 
(phone bill). 
Attempted to pay. 
Check returned.  
Response to SOR, 
Tr. 33-35, AE A, AE 
3, AE II. 
Efforts to pay 
thoroughly 
documented. 
1.d. Charged off 
account $2,574 
(credit card).  
See comments. See comments. SOR 1.d. & 1.h. 
same as 1.a. 
1.e. Charged off 
account $3,347 
(credit card). 
Currently 
unresolved/unpaid. 
Attempting to settle. 
Paid $100 to 
creditor. 
Response to SOR, 
Tr. 36-39, AE A, AE 
3, AE II. 
Efforts to resolve 
thoroughly 
documented. 
1.f. Charged off 
account $908 
(credit card). 
See comments. Tr. 39-41. SOR 1.f., 1.g. & 1.j. 
same as 1.b.  
1.g. Charged off 
account $1,370 
(credit card). 
See comments. Tr. 41-42. SOR 1.f., 1.g. & 1.j. 
same as 1.b. 
1.h. Charged off 
account $1,972 
(credit card). 
See comments. See comments. SOR 1.d. & 1.h. 
same as 1.a. 
 
4 
 
1.i. Collection 
account $134 
(cable). 
Paid. Response to SOR, 
Tr. 42-43, AE A. 
N/A. 
1.j. Collection 
account $1,311. 
See comments. See comments. Duplicate of 1.b. 
1.k. Collection 
account $3,751 
(penalties for 
breaking lease). 
Paid $25 to 
creditor. Attempting 
to settle. Currently 
unresolved. 
Response to SOR, 
Tr. 43-45, AE A, AE 
II. 
Efforts to settle 
thoroughly 
documented. 
1.l. Collection 
account $50 
(medical). 
Paid. Response to SOR, 
Tr. 45-46, AE A, AE 
II. 
N/A. 
 
As the chart demonstrates, Applicant paid, attempted to pay and/or resolved all 
debts supra. After Applicant’s divorce from his first wife, he relocated to another part of 
the U.S. Debts alleged are directly related to his divorce or move. Applicant’s costs 
associated with his divorce and move are $17,427. He has paid $52,840 in child 
support from June 2002 to December 2008. Applicant’s divorce was bitter, protracted, 
and costly. Applicant describes his former wife as “continuing to remain defiant with 
court orders related to my oldest son… .” He continues to be frustrated in exercising 
his visitation rights with his son, and must bear the legal and travel costs associated 
with exercising those rights. Applicant was also involved in an automobile accident in 
August 2006 leaving him with unreimbursed medical expenses. GE 2, AE 8. 
 
Applicant considered bankruptcy, but was advised “that (bankruptcy) would be 
an instant killer for my security clearance.” GE 2. The primary obstacle Applicant has 
encountered in attempting to settle with his creditors is the amounts the creditors 
require. He has not been able to convince them that his available income is insufficient 
to meet their demands. He will; however, continue his efforts to resolve his debts. 
Applicant’s wife is a real estate agent. Given the current state of the market, her 
commissions have decreased significantly. In 2008, she has earned only one $2,800 
commission in July. Those funds were applied towards Applicant’s attorney fees and 
visitation costs. Tr. 100. Applicant submitted a comprehensive budget that shows a 
net monthly remainder of $488. A review of his budget reflects that he and his family 
live a modest lifestyle. He has also taken on part-time work to augment their income. 
AE 7. 
 
Applicant provided four reference letters. Three of the letters are work-related 
and provide favorable comments about his character and trustworthiness. The fourth 
letter is from his pastor and advises Applicant attends church every Sunday, is a man 
of integrity and is very loyal to his family and parish. Applicant also submitted 
evaluations, awards and citations from his naval service, and performance evaluations 
from his civilian employers. All of the reference/work-related documents reflect that 
Applicant has been and is a consistent top-notch performer. He has a demonstrated 
track record of being a trustworthy individual and an asset to his 
organization/employer. AE A (TAB 2). 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG 18, the Government’s concern is: 
 
“[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 The Government established that Applicant owes debts alleged in SOR, less 
duplicates, through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented.  
 
Under AG ¶ 19, two disqualifying conditions raise a security concern: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s separation, divorce, move, and post-divorce expenses have been 
very costly. He has yet to completely recover from this major setback and move on 
financially with his second wife and family. He is; however, making good faith efforts to 
come to terms with his creditors. These efforts are thoroughly documented.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20, there are five potentially mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the conditions happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
7 
 
                                                          
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The facts of this case warrant application of all five of the mitigating conditions, 
in whole or in part. The financial difficulties Applicant is experiencing are directly 
related to his divorce from his first wife. He has been challenged, emotionally and 
financially, in exercising his parental visitation rights. However, the collateral affects of 
his divorce are leveling off. In addition to his separation and divorce, he was involved 
in an automobile accident in 2006. He has sought financial counseling on his own and 
through his employer. He established a number of his debts are duplicates, debts 
which have increased over time due to interest and penalties. Although Applicant has 
yet to resolve all of his past indebtedness, he has demonstrated he is making a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. In short, Applicant 
has demonstrated financial responsibility. He has established a viable budget, which 
shows a net remainder after he has paid his bills, and is able to save money. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.l.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
