                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01814 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) to update his security clearance on May 30, 2007.  On July 24, 2008, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for 
Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F.  
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 28, 2008. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 16, 2008.  He admitted five 
and denied two of the allegations under Guideline F.  He provided proof of payment of 
the two debts he denied.  He requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 27, 2008, and the case was 
assigned to me the same day.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 2008, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
for a hearing on November 20, 2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled.  The 
government offered six exhibits, marked government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 6, 
which were received without objection.  Applicant submitted 5 documents, marked 
Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A-E, which were received and admitted to the record 
without objection.  Applicant testified on his behalf.  The record was left open for 
Applicant to submit additional documents.  Applicant timely submitted one additional 
document marked App. Ex. G  The government did not object to the admission of the 
document (See Gov. Ex. 7, Department Counsel Letter, dated December 9, 2008), and 
the document was admitted into the record.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on December 2, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 35 years old and has been an electronics technician for a defense 
contractor for about 18 months.  He is single and has an associate's degree in 
electronics.  Applicant entered active duty with the Navy in 1992 directly from high 
school.  He served on active duty until 2000 in information technology, and left active 
duty with an honorable discharge as a petty officer second class (E-5).  After leaving the 
Navy, he worked for various defense contractors for short periods of time.  He was 
unemployed for times when the defense contractors ended or lost contracts.  He has 
held a security clearance for the last 18 years since entering the Navy (Tr. 23- 26; Gov. 
Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated May 30, 2007).  Applicant's monthly net pay, depending on the 
amount of overtime, is $3,400 to $4,000, with monthly expenses of approximately 
$2,000, leaving $1,400 to $2,000 monthly in discretionary or disposable funds.  
Applicant's father has been ill lately and Applicant is assisting him with his needs.  Most 
of Applicant's present discretionary funds are used to assist his father.  This leaves him 
most months with about $500 in disposable funds (Tr. 37-40, 48-50).  Applicant has not 
received any financial counseling, even after filing a bankruptcy petition in 2004 (Tr. 35-
36). 
 
Credit reports show that Applicant had the following delinquent debts; a judgment 
to an insurance company for $5,614 (SOR 1.a); a judgment on a personal loan debt for 
$5,540 (SOR 1.b); a collection account for a rental car agency for $843 (SOR 1.c); a 
credit card account charged-off for $418 (SOR 1.d); a judgment on a personal loan for 
$425 (SOR 1.e); a collection account for a cell phone of $79 (SOR 1.f); and a Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy filed on April 2, 2004, and discharged on May 9, 2005 (SOR 1.g).  Applicant 
denied the debts in SOR 1.a, and SOR 1.e since they were paid (Gov. Ex. 2, Credit 
Report, dated July 4, 2007).   
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.a is a judgment for $5,614 in favor of an insurance 
company.  Applicant provided sufficient information in response to the SOR to show 
payment of the debt (See Response to SOR, Letter, dated August 5, 2006). 
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.b is for a judgment on a personal loan for $5,540.  When 
he left the Navy and started working for defense contractors, Applicant had periods of 
 
3 
 
 
unemployment and difficulty meeting his financial obligations.  He volunteered at his 
church and met a woman who was also a volunteer.  She offered to assist him 
financially a number of times but Applicant at first did not accept the offer.  When his 
financial problems become acute, Applicant did accept the offer.  He and the women 
were not romantically involved but Applicant believed the woman wanted to be involved 
with Applicant romantically.  When this did not happen, he and the woman became 
estranged.  He did not know how to repay the loan and did not know the woman had 
filed a judgment until he received the SOR.  He had moved and the notice of judgment 
was sent to a former address.  After learning of the judgment from the SOR, Applicant 
tried to contact the woman to make arrangements to pay the loan.  He has not been 
able to contact her since she does not return his phone calls.  He is sending her $20 per 
pay period at her last known address as a good-faith effort to pay the loan.  He is 
continuing his efforts to contact the woman and will make larger payments when he can 
contact her (Tr. 26-33, 43-44; App. Ex. D, Money Orders, dated September 23, 2008. 
October 20, 2008, and November 19, 2008; App. Ex. F, Money Order, dated December 
5, 2008).   
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.c is an account in collection for a car rental fee of $843.  
Applicant rented a car for an individual who was to pay the rental fee.  The individual did 
not pay the rental charges and the rental car company entered a judgment for $843 
against Applicant as the individual responsible on the rental agreement.  Applicant did 
not know of the judgment until he received the SOR.  He is making $20 bi-weekly 
payments as requested by the rental car company.  He plans to increase payment when 
he receives his year-end bonus and tax refund (Tr. 19-20, 44-45; App. Ex C, Money 
Orders, dated September 23, 2008. October 20, 2008, and November 19, 2008; App. 
Ex. F, Money Order, dated December 5, 2008).   
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.d is for a charged off credit card account of $418 (Tr.33-
34).  Applicant tried to contact the company but could not reach an individual to help 
him.  He has an address for the company and is making $20 good-faith payments on 
the debt.  He will increase payments when he can finally talk to a representative of the 
company.  He intents to continue to contact the company and pay off the remainder of 
the debt as soon as he can using his year-end bonus and tax refund (Tr. 45-46; App. 
Ex. App. Ex E, Money Orders, dated September 23, 2008. October 20, 2008, and 
November 19, 2008; App. Ex. F, Money Order, dated December 5, 2008).   
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.e is a judgment on a personal loan for $425.  Applicant 
paid this judgment in 2004 (Tr. 18; Case File, Response to SOR, dated August 16, 
2008; App. Ex. B, Letter. Dated August 6, 2004 and Bank Cancelled Check, dated 
September 13, 2004). 
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.f is for cell phone account in collection for $79.  Applicant 
contacted the company for information on the account and was informed that they were 
unable to document the account.  The company waived any debt and ceased collection 
action (Tr. 16-18; App. Ex. A, Letter, dated August 19, 2008). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.g is for a bankruptcy filed on April 2, 2004.  After leaving 
active duty in the Navy, Applicant started working for defense contractors.  Applicant 
was laid of from employment with the defense contractors as they finished or lost 
contracts with the government.  He was unable to pay his debts because of the lack of 
steady employment and filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  His debts were discharged in 
May 2005 (Tr. 35-36; Gov. Ex. 3, Bankruptcy discharge, dated May 9, 2005). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18).  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  The delinquent debts that Applicant admits and are listed on the credit 
report are a security concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions 
(FC DC) ¶ 19(a) "inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts", and FC DC ¶ 19(c) "a 
history of not meeting financial obligations".   
 
 Applicant raised mitigating circumstances for his debts by his testimony.  I 
considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) "the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment" and it  has some application.  Two 
of the debts were paid off years ago and are not current debts.  Three of the other four 
debts are being paid.  The remaining debt of $79 was just waived by the creditor.  Since 
there are debts still being paid, there are current debts.  Applicant's debts were 
discharged by bankruptcy in 2004.  Applicant frequently encountered delinquent debts 
since there are a variety of debts from a credit card, personal loans, a car rental, and a 
cell phone bill.  Applicant initially encountered financial difficulty, but he is now solidly 
employed in the civilian workforce and his debts are under control.  His financial 
problems should not recur.   
 
 FC MC ¶ 20(b) "the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances" applies.  Applicant encountered financial 
 
6 
 
 
problem when first entering the civilian workforce.  He has taken positive steps to 
resolve those issues.  He paid some of the debts and he filed a bankruptcy petition to 
resolve his debts.  Applicant did not know about the judgment against him on a personal 
loan.  He did not know of a charged-off debt for a rental car he rented for someone else 
who was to pay the rental bill.  He did not know of the charge-off credit card debt but 
has attempted to contact the creditor.  Once he learned of the existence of these debts, 
he contacted the creditors the best he could and started payment plans on his own.  He 
acted responsibly under the circumstances to control and manage his debts. 
 
 FC MC ¶ 20(c) "the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or under 
control" does not fully applies.  Applicant has not received any financial counseling, 
even as part of his bankruptcy action.  However, his financial problems are being 
resolved and are under control meeting this prong.   
 
 FC MC ¶ 20(d) "the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts" partially applies.  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to 
apply, there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” 
of a good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is 
needed.  Applicant has the ability to pay the debts, has shown a strong desire to pay 
them, and has shown a good-faith effort to pay them.  Applicant paid two of the six 
delinquent debt years ago.  He has a payment plan and is paying under that plan on 
three of the other debts until he can make better plans with the creditors.  He contacted 
the creditor for another debt and the debt was waived because there is no record of the 
debt.  When he first encountered financial problems, he filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
and the debts were discharged in 2004.  Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of 
resolving indebtedness. Applicant has not incurred additional delinquent debts since the 
bankruptcy discharge.  Applicant acted responsibly towards his debts, and established 
his good-faith efforts to resolve his debts.  He mitigated security concerns for his 
financial situation 
 
 “Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered Applicant's eight years 
of active duty in the Navy and that he has successfully held a security clearance for 
over 18 years.  Applicant encountered financial problems when leaving active duty and 
entering the civilian workforce.  He paid two of the debts year ago.  He filed a 
bankruptcy action and his debts were discharged in 2005.  He was not aware of his 
other delinquent debts until the SOR, but acknowledges his legal obligation to pay them. 
He has payment plans for three of them and the fourth for $79 was waived for lack of a 
record of the debt.  Applicant lives within his means and meets his personal financial 
obligations.  His actions do not indicate poor self control, lack of judgment or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.  He is not financially overextended, and 
his finances do not create a security concern.  Overall, on balance the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
