 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03953
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On December 28, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On July 23,
2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under2
Guideline H (drug involvement).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on September 9, 2008, and I convened a hearing on October 21, 2008.
The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented four exhibits (Gx. 1 - 4).
Applicant testified and submitted two exhibits (Ax. A and B). I also left the record open
after the hearing to receive additional relevant information. On October 29, 2008, I
received a post-hearing submission, which is included in the record without objection as
Ax. C. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on November 5, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant used marijuana from age 17
until he graduated college in 1984 at age 25 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he previously submitted a
security clearance application in October 2001, thus becoming aware that illegal drug
use may raise a concern about his suitability to hold a security clearance (SOR ¶ 1.b);
and that Applicant again used marijuana, about 30 times, between May 2006 and May
2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
Applicant admitted with explanation all of the SOR allegations. As to SOR ¶ 1.b,
the facts alleged are relevant to this decision; however, they are not potentially
disqualifying in and of themselves. Rather, this allegation merely pleads evidence of
Applicant’s awareness of the security significance of his involvement with illegal drugs, a
fact I have considered in reaching my decision. SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for the
Applicant. I have also made the following additional findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 49 years old. He graduated from college in 1984 with a degree in
electrical engineering. Since at least August 2000, he has been employed in the
information technology (IT) sector. Since December 2007, he has worked for a defense
contractor as a senior engineer. He requires a security clearance for his current job, but
had submitted applications for a security clearance (SF 86) in October 2001, and for a
public trust position (SF 85P) in March 2006. Each of Applicant’s applications for
clearance or positions of trust required Applicant to disclose any involvement with illegal
drugs in the preceding seven years. (Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Gx. 4; Tr. 22 - 23)
Applicant first used marijuana at age 17 and continued to use it until he
completed his undergraduate studies in 1984. Applicant flunked out of the first college
he attended because he was “partying too much.” He continued his studies at a
community college before transferring to the college where he obtained his engineering
degree. Between 1984 and May 2006, Applicant was not involved with illegal drugs. (Tr.
30 - 31; Gx. 2)
 Directive. 6.3.3
3
Applicant is an avid musician and works with local students through recording
sessions at a studio in his house. On one evening in May 2006, Applicant and a friend
went to another person’s house to rehearse. At some point, that person produced some
marijuana and all three smoked it in a pipe. Before leaving that evening, Applicant
purchased about 1/4 ounce of marijuana for his own use. He smoked it by himself at
home over the next year at a rate of about twice monthly. (Tr. 32 - 35) At the time he
resumed his marijuana use, Applicant was working as a database administrator for a
company that supported a government agency. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Tr. 31, 49)
Applicant has been married since January 1988. His wife has used marijuana but
not in the past 25 years. She was aware, but did not approve of Applicant’s drug use.
(Tr. 47 - 48) Applicant stopped using marijuana in May 2007, in part, after his brother
died unexpectedly. Applicant claimed that event caused him to re-evaluate his life and
his priorities. He also is interested in living a healthier lifestyle. (Tr. 50 - 51; Gx. 2)
Applicant still sees occasionally one of the people with whom he used marijuana
in 2006. He also socializes with a neighbor whom he knows uses marijuana. Applicant
asserted that he has made clear to both that he cannot be involved in any way with
illegal drugs. (Tr. 37 - 38, 52)
In October 2008, Applicant completed six months of weekly drug counseling
sessions, which included periodic urine tests for marijuana and cocaine. Applicant has
repeatedly stated he would submit to drug testing at anytime, and he has submitted a
written statement of intent asserting he will not use illegal drugs in the future. (Answer to
SOR; Ax. B; Ax. C; Tr. 28)
Applicant has a good reputation at work. (Ax. A) He is also active in the
community through his musical work with local youth, and through free dog training
services he offers. (Tr. 38)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
4
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 24 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.6
Analysis
Drug Involvement.
The government presented sufficient information to support all of the SOR
allegations. The facts established by the government’s information and the Applicant’s
admissions raise a security concern addressed in AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
5
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
Applicant used marijuana while in college, but stopped 24 years ago. Had he not
resumed using marijuana in 2006, his past drug use would be of little or no security
concern. Further, his recent use was not a one time lapse in judgment that might be
written off as reliving old times with old friends. Applicant bought marijuana, which he
illegally possessed and used over the course of the next 12 months. Because he had
previously completed two government applications for positions of trust, it cannot
reasonably be disputed that he knew such conduct could cause the government to
question his suitability for access to classified information. Yet, he resumed using
marijuana about two months after he submitted his SF 85P, and continued using
through most of his tenure with the federal contractor where he worked immediately
before his current employer hired him. These facts require application of the
disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see definition [at AG ¶
25(a)]) and AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia).
In response, Applicant’s information shows he has not used illegal drugs since
May 2007, that he completed a program of counseling and drug testing between April
and October 2008, and that he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. Further,
although he still occasionally sees a friend with whom he used marijuana and who still
uses marijuana, Applicant has made clear that he will not tolerate any drug use in his
presence. These facts require application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(b) (a
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) dissociation from
drug-using associates and contacts...(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation). Additionally, while the counseling program he
completed was not prescribed by a medical professional, he is entitled to some limited
consideration under the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(d) (satisfactory completion of a
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a
duly qualified medical professional). 
Of the remaining Guideline H mitigating conditions with potential application to
these facts, I have specifically declined to apply the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(a)
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). His conduct must be considered
recent despite his current record of abstention from drug use. It is too soon to conclude
he will not use drugs in the future because of his resumption of drug use two years ago
 See footnote 3, supra.7
 See footnote 6, supra. 8
6
after a 24 year hiatus. For the same reason, Applicant may not benefit from AG ¶ 26(b)
(a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:...(3) an
appropriate period of abstinence). On balance, I am not persuaded that Applicant’s
illegal drug use is behind him. Applicant resumed frequent drug use after a long period
of abstinence, and he did so knowing that such conduct is illegal and directly at odds
with government policies about drug use. Notwithstanding the positive information about
Applicant’s conduct since May 2007, he has failed to mitigate the security concerns
established through the government’s information. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 49 years old and
presumed to be a mature adult. Since he graduated college in 1984, it appears he has
lived a stable and responsible lifestyle. He has been married for 20 years and, at least
since 2000, has been steadily employed in the IT industry. He stays active in the
community and there do not appear to be any concerns about his honesty or his job
performance. However, his decision to resume regular drug use severely undermines
the value of this positive information. It is recent, serious, and repeated conduct, and he
engaged in that behavior knowing that it was wrong. All of the information regarding
Applicant’s recent drug use make it more likely than not that such conduct will recur.
The facts and circumstances of Applicant’s drug use present an unacceptable
risk to the national interest were he to be given access to classified information. A fair
and commonsense assessment  of all available information shows there are still doubts7
about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s interests as his own.
Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such
doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
