FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04823
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On July 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 21, 2008 and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on August 26, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
October 8, 2008.  A hearing was held on October 8, 2008, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted
of three exhibits; Applicant relied on three one witnesses (including himself) and no
exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on December 12, 2008.  Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified
information is denied.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 2
Procedural Issues and Rulings
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to keep the record
open to enable to supplement the record with a more legible copy of his Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) medical records and update from his current VA treating physician
(Dr. A).  For good cause shown, Applicant was afforded two weeks to December 17,
2008 to supplement the record.  Applicant did not supplement the record.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline I, Applicant is alleged to have (a) been treated for post traumatic
syndrome disorder (PTSD) by the VA since at least 2003 and (b) been diagnosed in May
2008 by Dr. B with PTSD with psychiatric features, which in Dr. B’s professional opinion
could cause a significant defect in judgment and reliability.
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have (i) been terminated in December
1997 from a postal authority due to two cited incidents that occurred during Applicant’s
employment probation and (ii) been employed by 10 different employers since 1997.
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He
provided no explanations or affirmative claims in his answer.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old security guard for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1975 and served six years before his
discharge in 1981 (see ex. 2).  Following his discharge, he continued to serve in the
inactive Army reserves.  He completed his inactive reserve duty in 1997 (ex. 1), and
received an honorable discharge in recognition of his 23 years of military service (R.T.,
at 55).  He has completed college credits (R.T., at 47-49) and received satisfactory
grades for his work.
Applicant married his first spouse (W1) in 1979 and divorced her in April 1990.
He has two children and a grandchild from this marriage (see exs. 2 and 3; R.T., at 43).
Applicant married his second spouse (W2) in June 1990.  He currently lives with W2, his
two daughters, and his one grandchild.
Applicant’s Army reserve unit was activated for the Gulf War in 1989.  Applicant
served in the Gulf War theater as an Army MP between 1989 and 1990 (R.T., at 57-58).
Several years following his return from his Gulf War service he began experiencing
dreams about Iraq (R.T., at 58-59).  As these dreams intensified, he sought medical
assistance at a VA facility (R.T., at 59-60).  At the VA, he was treated for PTSD and
other psychiatric symptoms (see ex. 3; R.T., at 59-61).  
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 3
Applicant’s VA medical records cover his treatment at the VA between May 2003
and October 2006.  Applicant’s psychiatric difficulties include PTSD symptoms (including
intrusive memories, nightmares, insomnia, flashbacks, hyperarousal, hypervigilance,
avoidance, paranoia and depression). VA records also reveal Applicant’s history of
auditory hallucinations of people calling his name and visual illusions (see ex. 3). 
In 2000, he was diagnosed with PTSD with psychotic features.  In the periodic
evaluations he has received from the VA, he has consistently been diagnosed with
PTSD with prominent symptoms of paranoia, visual hallucinations, and anxiety, along
with the indicated possibility of an underlying psychotic process separate from his PTSD
disorder (see exs. 2 and 3).   More recently, his current mental health providers affiliated
with the VA confirmed that Applicant continued to suffer from PTSD with psychotic
features, along with a history of chronic intermittent psychosis (R.T., at 88-94). 
 While able to work as a security guard (according to his medical records), he still
reports more distress and paranoia and other observed psychiatric symptoms (see ex.
3).  His latest assessments reveal significant improvement (viz., no flashbacks or
nightmares and decreased anxiety). His current VA treatment plan calls for continued
medications prescribed by his treating physicians (Drs. B and D).  
In an October 6, 2006 memorandum, Applicant’s then-treating VA physician (Dr.
C) found Applicant to have a somewhat brighter affect, with more spontaneous speech
(see ex. 3).  Dr. C credited Applicant with benefitting from his current medication regimen
at the time, and did find Applicant to present no acute risk of harm to himself or others
(see ex. 3).  However, Dr. C did not find any basis to change either Applicant’s diagnosis
or prognosis in the future.
Still concerned about Applicant’s mental health, Applicant’s command referred
him to Dr. A (a licensed clinical psychologist) in May 2008 for a compulsory mental
health examination.  At the outset of his psychological session with Applicant, Dr. A took
some background information from Applicant.  Dr. A then reviewed Applicant’s VA
records and PTSD diagnosis before conducting an interview and administering a mental
health examination (ex. 2). According to Dr. A’s evaluation, Applicant’s evaluation
consumed approximately four to five hours and consisted of questioning and testing
(R.T., at 63-64).  Applicant considers Dr. A’s assessments to be biased and not
indicative of what kind of person he really is (R.T., at 64).
In his interview with Dr. A, Applicant described his various conditions.  In addition
to his PTSD, he suffered from high blood pressure, diabetes, acid reflux, a dislocated
disc in his back, anemia and lung disease (ex. 3).  Applicant identified the following
medications he is taking for his various medical conditions, including Quetrapine for a
psychic disorder, Oxycodine for pain, Citaloprain for depression, Metformin for diabetes,
and Hydrochlorothiazide for high blood pressure (see ex. 3).  He also takes Seroquel to
aid his sleep (R.T., at 51).  His medications are seldom adjusted, and he feels they have
helped to stabilize his emotional conditions (R.T., at 84-87).
Dr. A administered a separate mental health examination. He observed
Applicant’s affect to be dysphoric and his mood depressed (in part over his loss of a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 4
security job of four years).  Dr. A found Applicant’s psychomotor movements to be mildly
retarded.  Applicant informed Dr. A of his PTSD condition and his problems with sleep
and nightmares.  He described the voices he heard and flashes he detected from time to
time (ex. 3).  Dr. A credited Applicant with fair short term memory recall and poor
concentration.  Overall, Dr. A estimated Applicant to function within a low normal range
of cognitive ability.
Besides the medical history he obtained from Applicant and mental examination
he performed on the subject, Dr. A administered two separate tests to Applicant.  On the
Beck Depression Inventory, Applicant recorded a BDI rating of 12, indicating a mild
mood disorder (consistent with someone like Applicant who takes anti-depressant
medication).  In a second test, Dr. A administered the Minnesota Multi-plastic Personality
Inventory.  Results of this test confirmed the following: Applicant numbs his feelings with
stress; he feels alienated, is disorganized in his thinking; he has interpersonal
relationship difficulties; he feels broken and/or damaged and unlovable; he has impaired
reality testing; he has communication difficulties; and he habitually exercises poor
judgment (see ex. 3).
Based on his compiled interview data and review of Applicant’s medical records,
Dr. A found Applicant to have mild cognitive impairments.  Citing his observations of
Applicant, review of Applicant’s medical history and medications, mental health
examination, and administered tests, Dr. A diagnosed Applicant PTSD with psychotic
features on the Axis I scale of the DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Assoc. (2005)).  Dr. A
deferred any diagnosis on the Axis II scale and noted Axis IV stressors to include
unemployment and moderate familial disruption (see ex. 3).  Dr. A opined that
Applicant’s illness (a)  is of a continuing nature, (b) has and is causing a significant
defect in judgment and reliability with a poor prognosis for improvement, ©) and is a
condition that is not in remission (ex. 3).
Since 1997 Applicant has worked for 10 different employers for mostly periods of
short duration (see ex. 1; R.T., at 45-46).  There is no probative showing, though, that
Applicant showed a lack of judgment and reliability in any of these individual employs
(R.T., at 75-78).  While he freely admits to being terminated for cause by a postal
employer after the second of two vehicle accidents involving the truck he used in making
his work deliveries (R.T., at 68-73), he provides no probative indicators of reckless or
careless behavior.
Applicant assures he was not culpable in either of the two cited incidents and
reported each to his employer (R.T., at 68-73).  While a cause and effect relationship
between his two identified incidents and his eventual termination is evident based on the
facts presented, the evidence in balance does not establish that Applicant acted
recklessly or carelessly in either of the incidents.
Applicant’s coworkers find Applicant to be reliable and trustworthy (R.T., at 29-30,
39-40).  One coworker assures that Applicant is in good standing with his union and has
not had any grievances filed against him (R.T., at 38).  While on active duty, Applicant
received various awards recognizing his service contributions (R.T., at 56).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 5
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Psychological Conditions
The Concern: Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair
judgment, reliability or trustworthiness.  A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not required for
there to be a concern under this guideline.  A duly qualified mental health professional
(e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) employed by, or acceptable to and approved by
the U.S. government, should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference concerning the
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of seeking mental health
counseling.  See Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 27.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability
to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate
with the security clearance process. 
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 6
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Applicant presents as an experienced and well regarded security guard with a
lengthy medical history of PTSD with psychotic features that begin manifesting during
Applicant’s Gulf tour of duty in 1991.  Applicant has been treated at the VA fore his
disorder for over five years.  His compiled medical records from the VA and more recent
evaluation by a licensed psychologist engaged by DoD confirm the medical impressions
he made with his treatment providers assigned to treat him at the Va.  Afforded an
opportunity to provide an updated diagnosis and more positive prognosis, Applicant failed
to provide any post-hearing submissions.   His diagnosed disorder raises ongoing security
concerns.  Posing initial security concerns as well are Applicant’s termination stemming
from two adverse incidents that occurred during his probationary period in 1997, and the
multiple jobs he has held (10 in all) since 1997. 
Beginning in 1991 during his Gulf tour2004, Applicant began experiencing PTSD
symptoms (including intrusive memories, nightmares, insomnia, flashbacks, hyper-
arousal, hyper-vigilance, avoidance, paranoia and depression).  He continued to manifest
these symptoms years after his return from MP duty in the Gulf.  VA records also reveal
Applicant history of auditory hallucinations of people calling his name and visual illusions.
In 2000, Applicant self-referred himself to the VA for consultation and evaluation.
For the ensuing eight years, he was treated by trained VA medical personnel for his
diagnosed condition of PTSD with psychotic features.  All of the medical practitioners who
treated him at different intervals consistently diagnosed him with PTSD with psychotic
features.  
Applicant’s psychological issues
Appellant’s adverse psychological assessment raises security concerns about his
judgment and reliability to access classified information.  Applicable disqualifying
conditions raised by the emotional, mental and personality disorder guideline are DC ¶
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 7
28(a), “behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness
that is not covered under any other guideline, including but not limited to emotionally
unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior,” and DC ¶
28(b), “ an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the individual has a
condition not covered under any other guideline that may impair judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness.” Application of these guidelines, though, requires the assumed
acceptance of each of the identified medical professionals who evaluated him. 
Each of the covered evaluations by the VA medical specialists and the engaged
DoD psychologist consistently affirm a PTSD diagnosis with psychotic features for
Applicant, and offer little promise of his surmounting his disorder, even with the
medications he has been receiving to address his multiple symptoms.  Based on the
recent evaluations of Dr. A and his treating physicians at the VA (primarily Drs. B, C and
D), Applicant continues to suffer from a mental disorder (i.e., PTSD with psychotic
features) that could impact his judgment and reliability. 
While Applicant certainly benefits from the various medications he regularly takes
to stabilize his condition, he continues to exhibit signs in the professional opinions of the
mental health providers who have evaluated him over the past two years that he
continues to be at risk to judgment or stability lapses that might imperil the safety of his
employer or larger security interests of the nation.  Afforded an opportunity to provide
more positive evidence of progress with his disorder, he failed to do so.
Based on a thorough review of Applicant’s produced medical records to date in this
record, Applicant is not in a position to claim any of the benefits of the mitigating
conditions of the psychological conditions guideline.  Neither MC ¶ 29(a), “the identified
condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the individual has demonstrated
ongoing and consistent compliance with the treatment plan,”, MC ¶ 29(b), “ the individual
has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program for a condition that is
amendable to treatment, and the individual is currently receiving counseling or treatment
with a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified mental health professional,” MC ¶ 29©)
 “recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed by, or
acceptable to and approved by the U.S. government that an individual’s previous
condition is under control or in remission, and has a low probability of recurrence or
exacerbation,” or MC ¶ 29(e), “there is no indication of a current problem,” has any
applicability to Applicant’s diagnosed disorder and the treatment he is receiving to
stabilize his condition.   
Whole person assessment of Applicant’s medical disorder and steps he has taken
to neutralize risks of judgment relapses is not sufficient either to avert still active risks of
serious lapses associated with his disorder.  Without more persuasive medical data to
establish good remission and a promising prognosis, it is simply too soon to make safe
predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to withstand risks of potential judgment and
trust lapses associated with his diagnosed disorder. Taking into account all of the
compiled accounts and evaluations in this administrative record,  both from a proof and
current relevance context, Applicant fails to carry his evidentiary burden at this time, and
unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the guideline covering psychological
conditions.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 8
Personal Conduct issues
Personal conduct issues raised over Applicant’s (a) prior employment termination
as the result of two accidents he had with his work vehicle and (b) assortment of
employers he has had over the past eleven years (10 in all) are insufficiently developed to
establish any sufficiently probative links to judgment lapses covered by the personal
conduct guideline to substantiate the allegations in the SOR.  While both his two
accidents and work history may suggest some work-related deficiencies they do not
without more reflect lapses linked to his diagnosed disorder or security-related problems
that are necessarily implicit in his work history. Coworkers who have worked with
Applicant find him both reliable and trustworthy in his security assignments.  And the
evidence does not contain any documented reports of adverse information relative to
Applicant’s employment endeavors.
Considering all of the evidence and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
employment history, there is not enough to substantiate judgment and reliability
deficiencies under the personal conduct guideline.  Favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by the personal conduct guideline.  
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the factors enumerated
in the preamble of Appendix 8 of Regulation 5200.2-R and the Personnel Security
Standards and Procedures Governing Eligibility.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors listed above, this Administrative Judge makes the following
formal findings:
PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1a and 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
PERSONAL CONDUCT: FOR APPELLANT
Subparagraphs 2a and 2.b: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 9
