 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01310
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
On August 24, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a set of interrogatories to obtain clarification of and/or additional
information about adverse information in her background.  After reviewing the results of1
the background investigation, including her response to the interrogatories (Gx. 2),
DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 My file did not contain a copy of Applicant’s request for hearing. However, at hearing, Department Counsel4
produced his copy of Applicant’s request, and Applicant confirmed she had requested a hearing as part of her
response to the SOR.
2
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified
information. On July 11, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline J (criminal conduct) and Guideline H3
(drug involvement).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing.  The case was4
assigned to me on September 9, 2008, and I convened a hearing on October 21, 2008.
The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented three exhibits (Gx. 1 -
3). Applicant testified and submitted one exhibit (Ax. A). DOHA received the transcript of
hearing (Tr.) on November 5, 2008. 
Procedural Issue.
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR based on evidence presented at
the hearing. Applicant did not object to the motion. I also made changes to the SOR to
correct typographical errors. (Directive, E3.1.17; Tr. 16 - 19, 55 - 59) As a result, SOR ¶
1 has been amended to read as follows:
“a. On or about September 2006, in Charleston, South Carolina, you were
charged with Possession with Intent to Distribute (PWD) Cocaine. As of April 29,
2008, disposition in this case is pending.
b. On or about August 2006, you were arrested in or around Charleston, South
Carolina and charged with Simple Possession of Marijuana. You spent one night
in jail and were released on a bond in the approximate amount of $465.00. As of
April 29, 2008, disposition in this case is pending.
c. In approximately August 2002, you were arrested in or around Charleston,
South Carolina and charged with Distribution of Ecstacy. After completing a five-
month pre-trial intervention program, the charge was dismissed on approximately
May 6, 2003.”
Findings of Fact
In addition to the allegations of criminal conduct (Guideline J) in SOR ¶¶ 1.a -
1.c, cited above, the government alleged that, in August 2002, Applicant purchased for
$250 with intent to transport 10 tablets of Ecstacy, and that she subsequently
transported same from Florida to South Carolina (SOR ¶ 1.d); and that she illegally
 According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse web page (http://www.nida.nih.gov), ecstacy5
(methylenedioxymethamphetamine or MDMA) is a synthetic, psychoactive drug that is chemically similar to
the stimulant methamphetamine and the hallucinogen mescaline. It produces an energizing effect as well as
feelings of euphoria, emotional warmth, and distortions in time perception and tactile experiences. MDMA is
taken orally as a capsule or tablet. It was initially popular among adolescents and young adults in the nightclub
scene or at weekend-long dance parties known as raves. 
 This person was working with local police as an informant to gain favor after she herself was arrested for a6
drug-related offense. (Gx. 2)
3
used marijuana in June 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.e). The government cross-alleged the same
conduct as involvement with illegal drugs (Guideline H) in SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 2.e. Although
she did not specifically answer the SOR ¶ 2 allegations, her answers to SOR ¶¶ 1.a -
1.e apply to SOR ¶ 2. (Tr. 11 - 13) Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶
1.b - 1.e, but denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. I have also made the following
additional findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 25 years old and employed as a logistics manager by a defense
contractor. She was hired by her employer in September 2006 as a stock clerk and has
been steadily promoted during her tenure there. (Gx. 1; Tr. 51 - 52) Applicant graduated
from high school in 2001. Her one and only use of illegal drugs was a single use of
marijuana in June 2001 around the time she graduated. In July 2001, she got married,
but the relationship turned abusive and she left her husband in December 2001. A
divorce was finalized in September 2006. In her e-QIP, she indicated she did not know
her ex-husband’s whereabouts because of a restraining order in place against him. (Gx.
1; Tr. 44)
In January 2002, Applicant enrolled in a South Carolina college to complete
degree studies she had started at a community college while she was still living with her
ex-husband. In August 2002, Applicant was visiting a friend in Florida. A college friend,
whom Applicant had known only a short time, called Applicant and asked her to
participate in a drug deal. Applicant agreed to meet a third party, obtain 10 tablets of
ecstacy,  an illegal drug, and bring the drugs back to South Carolina. Applicant did so,5
and when she met her friend  she was arrested and charged with Distribution of6
Ecstacy, a violation of South Carolina law. Because Applicant was not the major drug
source the police were looking for, she was able to reach an agreement with
prosecutors to avoid trial. Applicant completed a pre-trial diversion program, which
resulted in dismissal of the charges and expungement of the matter from her record in
July 2003. (Gx. 2; Tr. 33 - 35, 45 - 46)
On August 5, 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with simple possession
of marijuana (28 grams or less). She had been on a boat with her then-boyfriend and
three other people. All five people aboard had bags in which they carried personal
items, snacks, and so on. At some point, Department of Natural Resources police
patrolling the area stopped the boat Applicant was in. A search of the boat ensued and
a small amount of marijuana was found in one of the five bags. The owner of the boat
took responsibility for the drugs. However, when the boat returned to shore the police
decided to charge everyone with possession of marijuana. No drugs were found in
 Directive. 6.3.7
4
Applicant’s bag or on her person. Nor was anyone using drugs while on the boat. (Gx.
2; Tr. 35 - 43, 47 - 48)
The August 2006 drug possession charge was still pending as of Applicant’s
hearing in this matter. She has never had to appear in court to answer this charge. An
October 15, 2008, letter from her attorney to the presiding judge indicated that the
charge will likely be disposed of through Applicant’s plea of guilty to a charge of
disorderly conduct. The drug charge would then be dismissed. (Ax. A) At one point
during the pendency of the drug charge, Applicant was told by her attorney that police
had obtained a direct indictment, that is, an indictment by a grand jury without a
preliminary hearing on the charge of possession of cocaine with intent to distribute.
Applicant saw the police find marijuana during the search but never saw them find any
cocaine. (Tr. 38, 47 - 48)
When Applicant submitted her e-QIP, she answered “yes” to question 23(a)
(Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offense?) and listed a
September 2006 direct indictment for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute.
(Gx. 1) When she responded to the DOHA interrogatories in April 2008, she answered
question #7 (Have you ever been arrested, charged, or held by any law enforcement
authorities for any reason?) in the affirmative. She listed her 2002 arrest for ecstacy
distribution, her 2002 arrest for marijuana possession, and a possession of cocaine with
intent to distribute charge. (Gx. 2) At her hearing, she testified that she listed the
cocaine charge because of what her attorney had told her. In another part of her
response to interrogatories, Applicant further stated that she and her attorney had not
received any paperwork about the cocaine charge. The government has presented no
independent evidence showing Applicant has ever been charged with a cocaine-related
offense. The FBI arrest record presented as Gx. 3 lists only the August 2006 marijuana
charge. Applicant’s attorney has since told her that there was no indictment for cocaine
possession. Having heard Applicant’s testimony on this matter, including her responses
on cross-examination and to questions from the bench (Tr. 28, 38 - 39, 43 - 44, 48 - 50),
and having considered the government’s argument in support of the allegations in SOR
¶¶ 1.a and 2.a, I specifically find as fact that Applicant was not charged with any
cocaine-related offense. 
Since her 2002 arrest, Applicant has disassociated herself from people who use
drugs. She testified credibly that she was unaware her boyfriend was involved with
drugs until they were arrested in September 2006. Thereafter, she threw him out.
Applicant lives a stable lifestyle. She owns her own home and is active in the
community through volunteer work with a crisis hotline, the SPCA, and the Girl Scouts.
(Tr. 31)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 24 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) and AG ¶ 30 (Guideline J - Criminal
Conduct).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to8
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  9
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.10
6
Analysis
Criminal Conduct.
The government’s information does not support the controverted allegation in
SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant was charged with possession of cocaine with intent to
distribute. While the SOR allegation was made in good faith based on Applicant’s
disclosures in her e-QIP and in her response to DOHA interrogatories, no other
independent evidence of the alleged conduct was presented by the government. All
available information bearing on this allegation shows Applicant, based on what she had
been told by her attorney at the time, was simply being candid, albeit misinformed, in
response to the government’s questions. However, as to the remaining allegations of
criminal conduct, the government presented sufficient information to show Applicant had
used an illegal substance in 2001, that she had bought and transported interstate an
illegal drug in 2002, conduct for which she was arrested, charged and convicted in
2002, and that she was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana in 2006.
The foregoing raises a security concern addressed in AG ¶ 30 (criminal conduct); to wit:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
More specifically, Applicant’s conduct requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶
31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted). However, as to the 2006 marijuana
charge that is still pending after more than two years and is likely to be disposed of
through a plea deal, the record supports a conclusion that Applicant did not possess
marijuana as alleged and likely has not used marijuana or any other illegal substance
since 2001. As to her 2002 arrest and conviction, this appears to be her most recent
criminal activity. Owing to the passage of time and positive information about her
lifestyle since then, this offense does not currently reflect adversely on her judgment
and she is not likely to engage in such conduct in the future. The foregoing requires
application of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 32 (a) (so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), AG ¶ 32(c) (evidence that the person did
not commit the offense) and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation;
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement). On balance, I conclude the security concerns
presented by the government’s information about Applicant’s criminal conduct are
mitigated.
Drug Involvement.
As alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d and 2.e, the government presented sufficient
information to show that Applicant used marijuana once in 2001 and that she bought,
7
possessed and transported ecstacy in 2002. For the reasons noted above, there is no
support for the SOR ¶ 2.a allegation that Applicant possessed or intended to distribute
cocaine. Nor does it appear that she possessed marijuana in 2006 as alleged through
SOR ¶ 2.b. Nonetheless, the government’s information raises a security concern
addressed in AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see definition [at AG ¶ 25(a)]) and AG
¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). By contrast,
available information shows Applicant’s last knowing involvement with illegal drugs was
in August 2002. She was unaware until a police stop and search that anyone she was
with on the boat in August 2006 was involved with illegal drugs. Indeed, when she
became aware that her boyfriend used drugs, she ended their relationship. She has not
knowingly associated with anyone who uses drugs since 2002. 
Available information requires application of the mitigating conditions listed at AG
¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) dissociation from drug-using
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence...). Having considered all of the
information bearing on the allegations under this guideline, including positive information
about her current lifestyle, I conclude the security concerns presented by the
government’s information about Applicant’s drug involvement are mitigated.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines H and J. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 25 years
 See footnote 7, supra.11
8
old and presumed to be a mature adult. She has worked in the same job for just over
two years and has been promoted steadily, ostensibly as a result of her reliability. Her
employment record does not reflect periods of unemployment that might be
characteristic of someone with a drug problem or who is prone to criminal conduct. She
lives a stable lifestyle as a homeowner and community volunteer. Having observed her
demeanor at hearing, I found her credible and her testimony devoid of any evasiveness
or attempts to avoid responsibility for her actions. The facts and circumstances of
Applicant’s criminal conduct and drug involvement no longer present an unacceptable
risk to the national interest were she to be given access to classified information. A fair
and commonsense assessment  of all available information shows Applicant has11
overcome the doubts about her ability or willingness to protect the government’s
interests as her own raised by the adverse information in her background.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
