1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03047
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant signed Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP),
on June 26, 2007. On July 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns regarding
criminal conduct (Guideline J) and financial considerations (Guideline E). The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On July 23, 2008, Applicant signed a notarized document in which he admitted
the allegation raised under Guideline J and admitted two of the three allegations under
Guideline F. He also requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA
received the request on August 8, 2008, and I was assigned the case on August 18,
2008. Department Counsel and Applicant agreed to a September 17, 2008, hearing
 TR. 45.    1
 The female Marine’s unauthorized absence was imputed on to Applicant as an aider and abetter.    2
2
date. A notice to that effect was issued by DOHA on August 27, 2008. The hearing was
timely convened. Department Counsel introduced five documents, accepted into the
record as exhibits (Exs.) 1-5 without objection. Applicant gave testimony and offered no
documents. He was given until September 26, 2008, to submit any documents for
consideration. Five documents were received by Department Counsel via facsimile
transmission on September 30, 2008. Department Counsel forwarded them to me
without objection on October 2, 2008. They were accepted into the record as Exs. A-E.
The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 3, 2008, and the record was closed. Based
upon a review of the limited case file and exhibits presented, Applicant failed to carry
his burden and mitigate security concerns. Clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old currently teaching at a community college. He has a
bachelor’s degree in Computer Sciences, a master’s degree in information technology
management, and a master’s degree in information security. He served nearly 17 years
in the United States Marine Corps. Divorced, he is the father of a 12-year-old daughter.
In 2003, Applicant was still married, in the Marines, and had recently been
selected to be a Warrant Officer I in the Marines. One day in November 2003, he got a
call from a young female Marine, claiming she had been raped and that the command
was not doing anything about it. He had not heard a rape reported, so he started asking
questions within the command. She went into hiding. He located her and met her in
town. During the time together, they secretly became intimate and violated the Marine
Corps fraternization policy. Soon thereafter, he was interviewed about her whereabouts.
Applicant, however, felt the investigators were more interested in his involvement with
the woman. He was interviewed again. The investigator suggested he might be in
violation of the fraternization order. Later, Applicant was interviewed at the local sheriff’s
department about the missing woman. He made a number of phone calls, resulting in
the discovery of her most current location. When it was determined she was unharmed,
Applicant assumed the matter was over. 
Soon thereafter, Applicant met with investigators from the criminal investigations
division (CID). He believed that a number of irregularities were taking place during the
investigation. Consequently, he was mistrustful of the military attorneys available to
provide guidance and defend him. Borrowing about $7,500 from his credit union,
Applicant hired a private attorney.  Eventually, a special court-martial was held.1
Applicant appeared before a jury and entered not guilty pleas. In April 2004, he was
found guilty of three counts under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ): Article
86: Unauthorized Absence,  Article 92: Violate Lawful General Regulation, and, with2
some exceptions, Article 134: Adultery. The sentence was reduction to the E-1 pay
grade and six months confinement. The case was reviewed and approved. He was not
given a bad conduct discharge, but an administrative discharge was arranged.
 Tr. 26.    3
 Tr. 39.    4
 e.g., Ex. E (Sept. 2008 statement).    5
 Tr. 27.    6
 Tr. 60.    7
3
Applicant was discharged in June 2004. He went to live with his mother. He used about
$10,000 from a credit line to pay his bills and transition back to civilian life.  He then3
returned to college, where he recently earned a second master’s degree. He was hired
for a network administrator job in July 2005, but that job ended in June 2007. Since
then, he has been teaching.
Applicant is unsure of what subsequent reviews of his case took place. He
solicited assistance from a national legal group, but no progress was made. He then
called the Marine Corps, which transferred the matter to the Naval Review Board,
where the case now resides. Presently, however, Applicant cannot afford the $10,000
fee for a private attorney.  He is contrite over the incident and recognizes his guilt, but4
maintains the process used was flawed.
Applicant admits he owes his credit union a balance of $7,573 for an attorney he
hired prior to his court-martial. That account is now handled by a collection agency.
Applicant states that he has made regular payments of about $25 per month on the
account since 2007, but concedes there were periods when he was unable to pay.  5
Also delinquent is a bank card account with a balance of approximately $10,723.
It is the account Applicant used to“help establish [him] back [home] and pay off any
loans [he] had from whatever.”
A $94 tele-communications bill remains outstanding in his name. The debt was
incurred by his ex-wife. Applicant testified he disputed the account entry on his credit
report, but provided no evidence of such dispute.    6
Applicant shares custody with his daughter. Child support has been his top
financial priority and his payments are up to date. Applicant stresses that he is currently
undergoing an atypically rough time following his discharge, noting that before his
discharge, he was always timely with his bills.  He also noted the difficulty in finding7
work in his region currently.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).    8
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).    9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).    10
 Id.    11
4
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior,
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative
process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial
and common sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny
of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative
Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a8
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  9 10
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.    12
5
information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a
determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the12
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) to be the most pertinent to the case.
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. With respect to Guideline J (Criminal
Conduct), the Government has established its case. Applicant admits he was convicted
under three articles of the UCMJ. Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC)
AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”), and CC DC AG ¶ 31(c)
(“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted”) apply.
The incidents giving rise to Applicant’s conviction before a special court-martial
occurred in November 2003. His behavior at the time clearly demonstrated poor
judgment, particularly in light of his recent selection for promotion. He has been tried,
however, received his sentence, and been penalized. Over five years have passed
since the incident occurred. Having been administratively discharged, there is little
likelihood such an incident will be repeated. He acknowledges his wrongful behavior
and is contrite. There have been no subsequent acts, criminal or otherwise, bringing
into question Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. Consequently,
Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition (CC MC) AG ¶ 32(a) (“so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) applies.
Applicant admits to the conduct alleged and to his military convictions. Therefore,
neither CC MC AG ¶ 32(b) (“the person was pressured or coerced into committing the
act and those pressures are no longer present in the person’s life”) nor AG ¶ 32(c)
(“evidence the person did not commit the act”) apply.
Since the 2003 incident and 2004 military conviction, Applicant has lived a quiet
life. No subsequent criminal activity has occurred in the intervening years. He has
expressed his contrition over the incident. He returned to graduate school and earned a
second master’s degree. Applicant is currently teaching at a community college. CC MC
AG ¶ 32(d) (“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18.    13
6
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement”) applies. 
Applicant’s military conviction occurred about five years ago. He is unlikely to find
himself in such an unusual scenario again. Now a civilian, he has moved on and tried to
put his past behind him. With his extra graduate degree, he is currently sharing his
passion for technological management and security with students. While Applicant
remains discontented over his conviction, it is not with regard to his behavior or the
conviction, but the process used. There is nothing in the record to suggest he will again
engage in activities which bring into question his ability or willingness to comply with the
law, rules, or regulations.  
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Conversely, an individual
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  The Regulation sets out several potential disqualifying conditions. 13
Worried that legal proceedings would be commenced against him, Appellant
took borrowed money to hire an attorney. After his discharge, he took a second loan
against a credit card to pay off bills and make a fresh start. As well, a minor
telecommunications charge appears on an account in his name. All accounts remain
substantially unaddressed to date. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”)
and .FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) apply. With
such conditions raised, it is left to Appellant to overcome the case against him and
mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant mistrusted the free military legal aide available to him while he was
under investigation, so he hired a private attorney. Later, he took a $10,000 loan to help
him transition back into civilian life after his convictions. Both of these obligations came
about as a consequence of the volitional act he performed which led to his court-
martial. Therefore, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b)
(“the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances”) does not apply.
Despite some nominal payments on one account and Applicant’s testimony he
has disputed one nominal bill, Applicant has over $18,000 in delinquent debt which
remains largely unaddressed. Therefore, neither Financial Considerations Mitigating
7
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”), FC MC
AG ¶ 20(d), (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts”), nor FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (“the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control”) apply.
Little has been done to address Applicant’s debt since it was acquired. Although
his employment has been erratic since leaving the military, Applicant has failed to offer
evidence of any alternative strategies or approaches he might have made to address
his debt, such as utilization of an effective financial counselor, bankruptcy, or
comprehensive repayment or consolidation plan. With the balances virtually unchanged
and no documentary evidence of efforts to resolve his debt, combined with a failure to
outline strategies on how he might address this debt in the near future, financial
considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person” factors.
Applicant is a mature, intelligent, and affable man whose military career took an
unexpected turn. Convicted under the UCMJ nearly five years ago, Applicant was
punished and lost his career. Contrite, he has since led a life devoid of crime and
conflict. Applicant has mitigated criminal conduct security concerns. 
Feeling pushed through the military justice system in a manner Applicant is still
convinced was inappropriate, he was discharged with significant legal debt. In turn, debt
was incurred to pad his transition back to civilian life. Since that time, there has been
virtually no concerted effort to address it in any comprehensive manner. Barring
tangible evidence of such efforts, financial considerations security concerns remain
unmitigated. Clearance is denied.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
