1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-02457
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Samuel L. Hart, Esquire
December 15, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on May 3, 2007.  On June 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 9, 2008.  She answered the
SOR in writing on July 19, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  DOHA received the request soon thereafter, and I received the case
assignment on August 12, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 19, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 19, 2008.  The Government
offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 8, which were received without objection.  Applicant
2
testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through F, without
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on September 29, 2008.
The record closed on September 19, 2008, the date of the hearing.  Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations of the
SOR, without explanations.  
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Due to a business downturn in the aerospace industry, the Applicant lost her job
in 1999 (TR at page 26 lines 2~9, at page 27 line 7 to page 29 line 11, at page 35 line
17 to page 37 line 17, and AppX E).  As a result, she was unemployed or
underemployed until she acquired her present full time employment in 2005 (Id).  She
has now addressed all of her alleged past due debts, has a positive monthly cash flow,
and about $8,500 in savings (TR at page 39 line 7 to page 41 line 4).
1.a. and 1.b.  During her period of unemployed or underemployed, Applicant
“obtained independent [medical] insurance” (TR at page 41 line 5 to page 43 line 4).  It
did not pay all of her medical claims; and as a result; she had a total of $197 in past due
medical bills (Id).  These have been “PAID IN FULL,” as is evidenced by receipts from
the two creditors’ collection service (TR at page 30 line 18 to page 32 line 13, and
AppXs A and B).
1.c.  The Applicant has settled and paid a $10,434 credit card debt for $5,300
(TR at page 32 line 24 to page 34 line 2).  This is evidenced by a letter from the
successor creditor to this debt, and by a “trust check” drawn to that successor creditor
(AppX D).
1.d.  The Applicant has paid in full a $1,251 credit card debt, as is evidenced  by
a letter from the successor creditor to this debt (TR at page 32 lines 14~23, and AppX
D).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
3
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
4
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  During her extended period of unemployment
or underemployment, the Applicant accumulated her delinquent debt.  These are clearly
countered by the Mitigating Conditions found in Subparagraphs 20(b) and 20 (d).  Under
Subparagraph 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, . .
.), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Furthermore,
Subparagraph 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Here, the Applicant
has addressed all of the alleged past due debt.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Here, she has the unqualified support
of her manager (AppX E).
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns
arising from his financial considerations.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
