 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01715 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations and personal conduct. He falsified his security clearance application. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) (GE 1) on April 28, 2006. On July 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 23, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on September 24, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 9, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on October 27, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, 
which were received without objection (Tr. 35-36). Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 11, which were received without objection. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until November 2, 2008, to submit 
additional matters. He submitted AE 11 post-hearing. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on November 6, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 
and 1.e-1.g. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 2.a-2.c. After a thorough 
review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old senior systems analyst. He graduated from high school 
around 1988, and has taken college courses on and off over the years (Tr. 5). He 
enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in November 1990, where he served honorably for 14 
years (DD 214).2 In 1993, he received access to classified information at the secret 
level. His access was upgraded to the top secret level in 2000 (Tr. 7). He has had 
continuous access to classified information since then.  
 
Applicant married his wife, who was also serving in the Air Force, in February 
1996. They were divorced in February 2004. He has two children, a 13-year-old boy 
born of this marriage, and a 14-year-old daughter from a prior girlfriend (Tr. 14). 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant included numerous Air Force documents 
and e-mails showing that he served with distinction. His service awards/decorations 
include, in part, Air Force Achievement and Commendation medals, and three Air Force 
Good Conduct medals. He distinguished himself through his dedication and hard work 
as demonstrated by his selection as non-commissioned officer of the quarter, his 
evaluation report, and numerous letters of commendation/appreciation for a job well 
done. He was specifically commended for his professionalism, strong work ethic, 
technical knowledge, loyalty and maturity. Applicant’s primary military occupational 
specialty was communications and computer systems (DD 214). 
 
In 2004, Applicant was having marital difficulties and he suspected his wife was 
having an affair. Seeking evidence of the affair, Applicant illegally accessed his wife’s e-
mail account in the Air Force’s computer system. When she discovered that Applicant 
had accessed her e-mail account, she complained to her command about his illegal 
intrusion.  
2  See documents attached to Applicant’s answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
 
In February 2004, Applicant was offered non-judicial punishment (GE 3). He 
consulted with a lawyer, waived his right to demand a court martial, and accepted non-
judicial punishment. In March 2004, Applicant was found guilty of violating an Air Force 
general regulation by wrongfully viewing his wife’s files or communications without 
appropriate authorization. His punishment included a reduction in grade to senior 
airman (E-4) (suspended), and forfeiture of $945 pay per month for two months. He did 
not appeal his punishment.  
 
In August 2004, he was separated from the Air Force at the rank of staff sergeant 
(E-5) (Tr. 5-7). He was unemployed for approximately three weeks. In September 2004, 
he began working as a senior systems analyst for a government contractor. In February 
2005, he started working for his current employer, another government contractor. 
Applicant claimed to be a valuable employee with a good record working for two 
defense contractors. Since he started working for government contractors his gross 
salary has been approximately over $95,000 a year (Tr. 157, GE 2). 
 
In April 2006, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (GE 1). In 
response to question 23.e (asking whether in the last seven years Applicant had been 
subject to court martial or other disciplinary proceedings under the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ) – including non-judicial punishment), Applicant deliberately 
answered “No” and failed to disclose that he received non-judicial punishment in 
February-March 2004. In November 2006, Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigator (GE 2). During the interview, Applicant indicated he had received no 
disciplinary action after his wife complained about his illegal intrusion into her e-mail 
account (GE 2). 
 
At his hearing, Applicant testified he did not believe he received non-judicial 
punishment while in the Air Force (Tr. 59). He remembered being punished by his 
commander for accessing his wife’s e-mail account; however, he claimed not knowing 
he received non-judicial punishment. His belief was based on the fact that he was 
considered a top non-commissioned officer (NCO), and to his recollection, his 
commander gave him a break (Tr. 59-62). In cross-examination, Applicant denied being 
familiar with the non-judicial punishment process, ever recommending a subordinate for 
punishment, or ever dealing with subordinates that had received non-judicial 
punishment (Tr. 68-74). 
 
In his answers to the financial questions, he disclosed that in the last seven years 
he had his wages garnished to pay child support obligations (e-QIP, question 27.b), and 
that he was participating in a financial counseling/debt consolidation program (e-QIP, 
questions 28.a & .b). Applicant’s background investigation addressed both his financial 
problems and the omission of material information from his security clearance 
application. 
 
Applicant explained he filed for bankruptcy protection in 1995 because he had 
limited earnings as a new E-1 in the Air Force. His financial situation was aggravated by 
 
4 
 
 
having to pay support for a child he had out of wedlock, and a change of station. He 
could not to afford to pay his child support obligation, his day-to-day living expenses, 
and his outstanding debts (Tr. 34-35, 54-55).  
 
The SOR alleges five delinquent/charged off accounts totaling approximately 
$27,000. SOR ¶ 1.b originated from a credit union loan Applicant made to consolidate 
his debts and purchase a car. At the time, he had received non-judicial punishment, he 
was separating from the Air Force, and was undergoing a divorce (Tr. 105). The loan 
became delinquent in 2004. The total for this delinquent debt is approximately $12,250 
(AE 1). In October 2008, the creditor accepted Applicant’s offer to start making 
payments of $200 monthly beginning on November 14, 2008.   
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($3,415) originated as a credit card debt, and it is still outstanding. 
Applicant settled and paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($950) on October 24, 2008 
(AE 11). Applicant paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e ($968) in April 2008 (Tr. 55). 
 
While in the Air Force, Applicant was paid a $10,000 reenlistment bonus. When 
he left the Air Force in 2004, the government initiated action to recoup the bonus, and 
the debt was referred to a collection agency (SOR ¶ 1.f ($10,134)) (Tr. 126). Applicant 
has made no payments to the government or the collection agency (Tr. 128). After his 
security clearance background interview in November 2006, Applicant contacted the 
collection agency seeking to settle his debt. According to Applicant, the collection 
agency refused to negotiate an affordable monthly payment plan (answer to the SOR, 
Tr. 54). He promised to contact the creditor again after paying other smaller debts. At 
his hearing, he indicated he currently cannot afford to pay this debt (Tr. 132). 
 
In May 2004, Applicant sought financial assistance/counseling through a debt 
consolidation company (CSA). He included the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c in 
his consolidation plan (Tr. 53). Applicant participated in CSA’s debt consolidation 
program from May 2004 to June 2006, and paid CSA $3,019 (Tr. 57-58, AE 11 at 3-11). 
Applicant established CSA was a rogue company which took his money and failed to 
pay his creditors and to assist him to negotiate and settle his delinquent debts. After he 
stopped working with CSA, Applicant did not contact the creditors again or make any 
further payments on these two debts until November 2008. He did not contact the 
creditors because he did not have the financial means to pay them. 
 
Applicant’s monthly take home pay is approximately $3,300. His monthly 
expenses include, in part, $1,500 in court ordered support for his two children; $950 
rent; $95 car insurance, and around $100 car maintenance expenses. His monthly net 
remainder is approximately $700 (Tr. 700). He drives a 2001 BMW X5 SUV he 
purchased used in 2004 (Tr. 143). While married, he had purchased a GMC Yukon 
Denali, and larger luxury SUV. In 2004, because of the pending divorce he downsized 
by trading in the Yukon Denali to purchase the BMW X5 (Tr. 153). He has been paying 
a $30,000 note for the last four years. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant does not have the financial means to make all his delinquent debt 
payments, child support obligations, and the day-to-day expenses associated with living 
in his state. He claimed to be making those payments he can afford (Tr. 65). Applicant 
believes his financial problems were the result of his divorce and his high child support 
payments (Tr. 161). His goal is to pay the small debts first and then pay the remaining 
debts one by one. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.3 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”4 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
3  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
4  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 1995. His debts were 
discharged in 1996. In 2008, Applicant paid two of the five delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e). He has three outstanding delinquent debts that have 
been charged off or in collection since around 2004-2005, totaling approximately 
$25,700. He presented some evidence of efforts to pay or resolve his legal obligations. 
He does not have the financial means to pay his legal obligations, delinquent debts, and 
his day-to-day living expenses. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
and, AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions (MC), I find that AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s behavior is recent as his debts are still outstanding. 
Considering his favorable evidence as a whole, Applicant failed to establish that his 
questionable behavior is not likely to recur.  
 
 Applicant presented evidence that established circumstances beyond his control 
contributing to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his divorce and separation from the Air 
Force. AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but only partially. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to 
show he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He purchased two luxury vehicles, 
apparently beyond his financial means. He made some effort to resolve his debts by 
 
7 
 
 
entering into a debt consolidation program which failed through no fault of his own. After 
the initial debt consolidation program failed in 2006, Applicant failed to take any further 
action to resolve his debts until he received the SOR. He has been consistently 
employed since he left the Air Force with a salary of approximately over $95,000. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because, although he paid two of his delinquent debts, 
there are no clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved or is under 
control. His inability to pay his debts shows he is financially overextended. Considering 
the totality of the circumstances, Applicant’s actions to repay his creditors do not raise 
to the level of good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG ¶ 15.  
 
Applicant failed to disclose relevant information in his answers to question 23 of 
his security clearance application. He also falsified material facts in his statement to a 
government investigator. Furthermore, Applicant’s testimony was less than candid. 
Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose the information. Numerous factors weighed in my analysis to reach that 
conclusion, including: Applicant’s maturity, his service and employment history, his 
demeanor and testimony, and the lack of credibility of his explanations. He served in the 
Air Force for close to 15 years, and by his own account, he was a top notch NCO. It is 
difficult to believe Applicant did not know he received non-judicial punishment in 2004. 
 
Because of his extensive experience in the Air Force and holding a security 
clearance, Applicant knew the importance of accurately completing his security 
clearance application and telling the truth. Nevertheless, he failed to provide information 
that was material to making an informed security decision and made false statements. 
AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire,” applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find none of the mitigating 
conditions apply to this case. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17(c), and find it does not 
apply since his behavior is recent and shows Applicant’s lack of reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
 
8 
 
 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well trained 
man. He honorably served 14 years in the Air Force, and has been successful working 
for two defense contractor for four years. He has held access to classified information at 
the secret and top secret level for approximately 15 years. Other than his illegal access 
to his wife’s e-mail account in 2004, there is no evidence to show Applicant has violated 
other laws and regulations or that he ever compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. Because of his rank and years of service in the Air 
Force, and his many years holding access to classified information, Applicant knew or 
should have known the importance of the trust placed on him by the government. He 
failed to be candid and honest on his security clearance application, during his 
background interview, and during his testimony at hearing. His behavior shows he lacks 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.e:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.f - 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
