 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06299 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 7, 2008. On 
August 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 15, 2008; answered it on 
September 2, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
 
2 
 
 
received the request on September 5, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed 
on September 23, 2008, and the case was assigned to me the following day. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on September 26, 2008, scheduling the hearing for October 
23, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through K, which were admitted without objection. 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until November 7, 2008, to enable 
her to submit additional documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
October 31, 2008.  
 
Applicant timely submitted AX L through DD by email, but some of her 
documents did not transmit completely. Email correspondence documenting her 
transmission difficulties is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. I granted her 
additional time to retransmit her documents, which were received on November 13, 
2008. AX L through DD were admitted without objection. I received Department Counsel 
comments concerning AX L through DD on December 4, 2008; and they are attached to 
the record as HX II. On December 12, 2008, I discovered that AX Z was incomplete, 
and I notified the Applicant. I received a complete copy of AX Z on December 15, 2008, 
and the record closed on that date. 
 
Correction of SOR 
 
 On my own motion, and without objection from either party, I amended the SOR 
to correct the spelling of Applicant’s middle name (Tr. 5).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. Her 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old executive assistant employed by a defense contractor.  
She has worked for her current employer since May 2007. She previously worked as an 
executive assistant for a private corporation from October 1990 to April 2001, was 
unemployed from April 2001 to July 2003, worked as an executive assistant for a 
defense contractor from July 2003 to March 2007, and was unemployed for about two 
months before starting her current job. She has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married in November 1985. She has a 27-year-old stepchild and 
two sons, ages 19 and 20 (Tr. 56). She and her spouse are still married but have been 
living apart since he left the household and moved to another state in August 2007 (Tr. 
105).  
 
Because Applicant’s younger son has significant learning disabilities (AX Z), she 
has enrolled him private schools. Even though her son receives substantial financial aid, 
Applicant spent more than $21,000 for his tuition, board, and room during the academic 
year 2006-07 (AX X at 2) and more than $14,000 for 2007-08 ( AX Y at 2). For 
 
3 
 
 
academic year 2008-09, his educational expense will be about $6,326 (AX AA at 5). 
Applicant anticipates that this educational expense will be reduced in September 2009, 
because her son has been awarded a full-tuition scholarship for college (AX L at 2).  
 
Applicant’s older son attended a private military school at a cost of about $23,000 
per year (AX W). He is now a college student, and his tuition, board, room, and school 
expenses are about $22,000 per year (AX BB). Her older son has applied for a 
scholarship (AX L at 1), but there is no evidence he has received it. 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law passed away in May 1989. She and her spouse paid his 
burial expenses (AX V). Shortly thereafter, her brother was killed, and they also 
assumed responsibility for his funeral expenses (Tr. 44). At the same time, Applicant’s 
mother-in-law was dying of cancer, and they supported her financially until her demise. 
When her mother-in-law died, they discovered she had no insurance, and they paid her 
funeral expenses (Tr. 45). 
 
Applicant and her spouse sold their home in August 1993 (AX R at 2-6), but they 
did not report a capital gain on their federal income tax because they invested their 
profit in a new home (AX R at 18). The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) assessed a 
capital gains tax on the profit from the sale of their home. They protested the 
assessment of a capital gains tax because the gain was reinvested in another personal 
residence of greater value (AX J). In January 1996, an explanation of the additional tax 
assessment was mailed by the IRS, but it was mailed to an outdated address, as was a 
deficiency notice in October 1996 (AX H at 1-5). 
 
Using the proceeds from the 1993 home sale, Applicant and her spouse 
purchased property and obtained a construction loan to build their “dream home” in 
March 1994 (AX R at 7-12). Her spouse, in addition to working full-time for the local fire 
department, served as general contractor and builder for the house (AX R at 18). They 
were forced to borrow additional funds when they encountered unforeseen problems 
such as a natural water spring under the property (AX R at 13-14).  
 
Applicant’s spouse was involuntarily retired for disability in August 1994, at about 
half his previous pay of $65,000 per year (AX S at 2). He was unable to complete 
construction of the house because of his disability and the technical problems they 
encountered (AX R at 18). They were never able to live in the unfinished house, and 
they sold it in October 1996 (AX R at 16-17). 
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted she knew they had an outstanding tax debt 
when they purchased the “dream home” property (Tr. 76). When asked if she chose to 
roll the profit from the 1993 sale into the new house instead of paying the tax debt, she 
stated she “really didn’t think about that at the time.” 
 
Applicant and her spouse were assessed with delinquent state taxes for several 
tax years starting in 1992 (AX H at 6). The delinquent state taxes accrued because 
Applicant was living in one state and working in another, and his employer (the fire 
 
4 
 
 
department) did not withhold income tax for their state of residence (Tr. 75). Because of 
the expenses they had occurred caring for family members and attempting to complete 
construction of their home, they were unable to pay the taxes. In April 1996, a state tax 
lien for $548 was filed against Applicant and her spouse (GX 3 at 3; AX F).  
 
 Applicant’s spouse found employment in November 1998, earning about $41,500 
per year (AX R at 19), In February 1999, Applicant and her spouse purchased a new 
home (AX R at 20-23). They filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2000, 
and they received a discharge in June 2000. Applicant’s e-QIP reflects that debts 
totaling about $25,411 were discharged.  
 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan for their delinquent federal taxes, and she 
made payments from 1994 to 2000. She stopped making regular payments after they 
purchased their new home in 1999, because she could no longer afford the payments 
(Tr. 89).  
 
Another state tax lien for $27,575 was filed against Applicant and her spouse in 
January 2004 (GX 3 at 5; AX E). In March 2005, a tax levy was imposed on her wages 
to collect delinquent federal taxes for tax year 1997 (GX 1 at 27; AX U). A third state tax 
lien for $9,206 was filed against Applicant in January 2006 (GX 4 at 1; AX G). 
 
Applicant’s father passed away in May 2006. She paid his funeral and burial 
expenses, totaling about $7,740 (AX DD).  
 
In March 2007, Applicant and her spouse sold the home they had purchased in 
February 1999 (AX R at 26-28), at a profit of about $130,000 (Tr. 59). They used the 
profits to pay off car loans, a portion of the tax liens, credit card debts, and tuition for 
their sons (Tr. 62-64). Applicant now lives with her mother, cares for her, and pays her 
monthly rent of $850 (Tr. 49, 52). 
 
Applicant’s federal tax debt for 1994 was paid as of October 2002 (AX C), her 
federal tax debt for 1996 was paid as of May 2006 (AX D), and her federal tax debt for 
1993 was paid as of October 2007 (AX B). The federal tax lien for tax year 1997 has 
been released (AX P at 2). 
 
The state tax lien filed in April 1996 was released in February 2000 (AX A, B, and 
Q). The balance on the state tax lien filed in January 2004 has been reduced to about 
$11,448 (AX N). The state tax lien filed in January 2006 has increased to $10,572 
because of accrued interest (AX O).  
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income is about $4,000. Her husband has been 
unemployed since late 2004, but he receives disability retirement pay of about $3,500 
per month (Tr. 51). She testified her husband does not help her with expenses, and that 
she is “95 percent” responsible for resolving the tax liens and supporting herself, her 
mother, and their two sons (Tr. 55). She has four credit cards and two charge accounts 
with a total balance of about $5,500, on which all payments are current (Tr. 57). She 
 
5 
 
 
owns an eight-year-old SUV, but she recently purchased a small, 14-year-old car for 
$500 to reduce her fuel costs. 
 
 Applicant applied for a second job with the U.S. Postal Service in September 
2008. She had completed her interviews and was awaiting medical clearance as of the 
date of the hearing (AX K; Tr. 48). 
   
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
6 
 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ AG ¶ 
19(g) is raised by Afailure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.@   
 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). AG ¶ 19(b) is not 
raised because there is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending.” AG ¶ 19(g) 
is not raised, because the tax liabilities alleged in the SOR did not arise from failure to 
file returns. Instead, they arose from a dispute about capital gains taxes on the home 
sale in 1993, the failure of her spouse’s employer to withhold state taxes, and their 
failure to pay the taxes that were due . 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 20(a) (“so long ago”) is not established because the 
delinquent taxes have not been resolved. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not 
established, because Applicant’s financial record reflects numerous delinquent debts. 
However, the third prong (“under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur”) is 
established. The fiasco surrounding Applicant’s efforts to build a “dream home” was 
fraught with unusual circumstances such as the discovery of an underground spring. 
The delinquent federal tax debt arose from a disputed assessment of capital gains taxes 
on the sale of a personal residence, and it is not likely to recur because Applicant no 
longer owns any real estate. The delinquent state tax debts arose because her spouse 
worked in one state and lived in another, a situation that is not likely to recur.  
 
The fourth prong (“does not cast doubt”) is not established. In some respects, 
Applicant has reacted to her financial problems responsibly. She has incurred 
considerable debt caring for her in-laws and her immediate family, motivated by a 
strong sense of familial obligation. On the other hand, her decision to purchase real 
estate in 1994 and again in 1999 while facing significant delinquent tax debt suggests 
bad judgment. Her decision to send her learning-disabled younger son to a private 
school was reasonable, but deferring resolution of her tax debts in order to send her 
older son to an expensive boarding school is not justified by the evidence in this record. 
While a private school may be reasonable or even necessary to provide personal 
attention, smaller classes, discipline, or specific values, Applicant has not provided any 
such justification regarding her older son, nor has she established the reasonableness 
of deferring payment of her delinquent taxes in order to defray the cost a boarding 
school instead of traditional arrangement where the student lives at home. I conclude 
the fourth prong of AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
 
8 
 
 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
Applicant has encountered numerous conditions beyond her control: the 
unforeseen technical difficulties in building the “dream house,” her spouse’s disability, 
her younger son’s learning disability, the illness and deaths of her father-in-law, brother, 
and father, and abandonment by her spouse. Applicant’s spouse abandoned the 
household in August 2007, long after the debts alleged in the SOR were incurred and 
became delinquent. Nevertheless, the other conditions beyond her control are sufficient 
to establish the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
When Applicant filed her bankruptcy petition in February 2000, it was a 
reasonable and prudent response to the debts incurred as a result of illnesses and 
deaths in the family and the financial drain of the “dream home” fiasco. On the other 
hand, using available assets in March 1994 and again in February 1999 to purchase a 
home instead of resolving the delinquent taxes was not responsible conduct. Incurring 
large educational debts to accommodate her younger son’s learning disabilities was 
responsible conduct, but there is no similar justification established on the record for the 
expense of a private boarding school for her older son. I conclude the second prong of 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
“[A]n applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that [he/she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR . . . All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that [he/she] has . . . established a plan to resolve [his/her] financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” ADP Case No. 06-18900 
(App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008).  
 
 Applicant and her spouse sold the family home in March 2007 and used the 
proceeds to pay off debts. She lives frugally and has applied for a second job so that 
she can resolve her remaining tax debt. On the other hand, she chose to use her limited 
financial assets to purchase the property and construct the “dream home” in 1994, 
purchase another home in 1999, and enroll her older son in an expensive boarding 
school instead of settling her tax debts. The federal tax lien for 1997 was not resolved 
by voluntary payment, but by a tax levy on her pay. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established 
for the debts discharged by bankruptcy alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and the state tax lien 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. It is not established, however, for the state tax liens alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c and the federal tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under in my discussion of Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is an intelligent, articulate, mature woman who presented herself at the 
hearing as candid and sincere. She is deeply devoted to her family, and she has been 
beset with numerous financial setbacks. She has not spent money selfishly or 
frivolously. However, she has not been diligent in resolving her tax debts. While some of 
her financial decisions, standing alone, might not raise security concerns, her financial 
record as a whole raises concerns about her judgment and reliability. The likelihood of 
recurrence cannot be discounted in light of her pattern of inattention to her delinquent 
taxes. Her continuing tax debt makes her vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
or duress.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
