                                                              
 
 
1 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-00832 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleged four delinquent debts. Two were 
discharged in his 2004 bankruptcy. Applicant’s first and second mortgage total 
$233,857. He failed to make any mortgage payments for the last nine months, accruing 
an additional $20,000 in delinquent debt. He currently retains a valid Cuban passport. 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations and foreign preference security 
concerns. Foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 26, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On August 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to him,1 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
 
1Government Exhibit (GE) 9 (SOR, dated August 12, 2008). GE 9 is the source for the facts in the 
remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
2 
 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR alleges 
security concerns under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference), B (Foreign Influence), E 
(Personal Conduct) and F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On September 26, 2008, DOHA received Applicant’s SOR response, and 
Applicant requested a hearing (GE 10). Department Counsel indicated he was ready to 
proceed on November 17, 2008, and on that same date the case was assigned to me. 
At the hearing held on December 9, 2008, Department Counsel offered nine exhibits 
(GEs 1-8, 12) (Transcript (Tr.) 16), and Applicant offered six exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibit 
(AE A-F) (Tr. 48-50). There were no objections, and I admitted GEs 1-8, 12 and AEs A-
F (Tr. 16-17, 34-35, 50). Additionally, I admitted the SOR (GE 9), his SOR response 
(GE 10), and a Hearing Notice (GE 11). Applicant received more than 15 days notice of 
his hearing (Tr. 28). I received the transcript on December 16, 2008.   
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel asked me to take administrative notice concerning materials 
related to the Cuba (Tr. 13-14; GE 12). Department Counsel offered in support of the 
requested administrative notice of facts concerning Cuba, supporting documents to 
show detail and context for those facts (Ex. I to VII—listed in Request for Administrative 
Notice at 3-4). I responded that I would take administrative notice of the facts in the 
four-page cover document; but not the underlying documents (Tr. 14). The parties did 
not object to my ruling (Tr. 14, 17-18).   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Exhibits I to VII are 
attached to GE 12 to ensure the administrative record is complete.  
 
 
3 
 
                                           
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his SOR response, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
2.a, 3.a, 4.a, 4.d and 4.e with some explanations (GE 10). His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.    
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor (Tr. 5, 19).3 He has 
worked for the contractor as a painter since 1996 (Tr. 19, 61). He does not now and 
never has had access to classified material (Tr. 6, 46). He married his spouse in 1999; 
and has two children ages five and three (Tr. 20; GE 1). Applicant earned a high school 
diploma and has not attended college (Tr. 5, 19). He has never served in the military 
(GE 1). His security application did not disclose a police record, or a felony conviction. 
There is no indication of illegal drug abuse or mental disability. He has never left 
employment under adverse circumstances. When he completed his 2006 SF 86, he 
disclosed his bankruptcy (GE 1).  
 
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant’s grandmother living in the United States obtained approval and 
Applicant, his parents and his sisters emigrated from Cuba to the United States in 1990 
(Tr. 20). Applicant’s parents were both born in Cuba and now are U.S. residents and 
citizens (Tr. 30, 34). Since emigrating from Cuba in 1990, his father visited Cuba three 
times, and his mother visited Cuba twice (Tr. 35). Applicant’s father is a pastor and 
communicated with pastors who live in Cuba (Tr. 45).   
 
Applicant was 10 or 11 years old when he immigrated to the United States (Tr. 
21). Applicant’s wife was born in Puerto Rico and she is a U.S. citizen (Tr. 36). His two 
children are U.S. citizens (Tr. 72). Applicant’s grandmother on his father’s side of the 
family, three uncles and five first cousins are citizens and residents of Cuba (SOR ¶ 2.a, 
GE 10). Applicant may communicate with his grandmother three times a year when his 
parents call her, and typically these communications occur when the family gathers 
together on holidays (Tr. 40-41). Applicant does not call her on his own (Tr. 41). He has 
three uncles living in Cuba, who are his father’s brothers (Tr. 41-42). His uncles living in 
Cuba do not have telephones, and the only time he might have talked to them was if his 
father called his grandmother and his uncle or uncles happened to be at her residence 
(Tr. 43). Applicant had about five first cousins living in Cuba (Tr. 43). His only contact 
with his first cousins was during his visit to Cuba in 2006 (Tr. 44). 
 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3GE 1 (2006 security clearance application) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless 
stated otherwise. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant was unsure about whether his relatives living in Cuba had served in the 
Cuban military, served in the Cuban government or received pensions from the Cuban 
government (Tr. 37-40, 42-44). Applicant visited his family in Cuba in November 2006 
for a week when he accompanied his parents and three sisters on the trip from the 
United States to Cuba (Tr. 24, 35, 46; SOR ¶ 2.b, GE 10). Applicant does not own any 
property in Cuba (Tr. 45). 
 
Applicant admitted exercising dual citizenship with Cuba and the United States 
(SOR ¶ 1.a, GE 10). He possessed a Cuban passport that was issued on July 14, 2006, 
and it is not due to expire until July 13, 2012 (Tr. 21-23; SOR ¶ 1.b, GE 10). He used his 
Cuban passport to enter and exit Cuba in 2006 (Tr. 46). He did not receive any 
financial, educational, medical or other benefits from Cuba after emigrating from Cuba 
in 1990 (Tr. 29). He did not exercise any other rights of a Cuban citizen after leaving 
Cuba in 1990 (aside from his 2006 use of his Cuban passport) (Tr. 29). Applicant 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1996 prior to applying for the Cuban passport (Tr. 
21; SOR ¶ 1.c). At the time of his hearing, he retained his Cuban passport (Tr. 23-26). 
He offered to give his Cuban passport to his facility security officer (FSO); however, he 
wanted to be able to use his Cuban passport if there was an emergency with a family 
member in Cuba (Tr. 25). He does not intend to live in Cuba (Tr. 46). His loyalty is to the 
United States (Tr. 47).  He did not provide any evidence that he actually turned-in his 
Cuban passport to his FSO. 
    
Republic of Cuba 
 
Cuba is a totalitarian state, which controls all aspects of life through the 
Communist party. Cuba has engaged in numerous human rights violations such as 
abuse of detainees, unlawful killings and beatings, and threats and abuse of Cuban 
citizens. The United States and Cuba have had a strained relationship since the early 
1960s, when Castro forcibly took over the Cuban government after several years of 
armed struggle. The United States continues to maintain economic sanctions against 
the Cuban government. Since 1982, Cuba has been on the U.S. State Department’s list 
of State Sponsors of Terrorism. Cuba maintains close relationships with Iran and Syria 
and has offered safe havens for members of terrorist organizations. Cuba targets the 
United States for intensive espionage activities, and there have been numerous 
reported cases of Cuban espionage against the United States.      
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant admitted that he answered, “No” on his September 26, 2006, security 
clearance application in response to Section 17d, which asked about whether in the last 
seven years he had an active passport issued by a foreign government (GE 10). He 
admitted he had a currently valid Cuban passport; however, he thought the question 
was seeking information about whether he had a passport to a country in addition to 
either Cuba or the United States (Tr. 32-33). He disclosed on this same security 
clearance application that he was born in Cuba and considered himself a dual citizen of 
 
 
5 
 
Cuba and the United States (Tr. 33, GE 1). He did not consider Cuba to be a “foreign” 
government (Tr. 33).  
 
Financial Considerations 
  
In 2003, Applicant’s wife became unemployed, which resulted in the loss of 
income and created financial problems (Tr. 51). After 2003, she was sporadically 
unemployed (Tr. 61-62). In 2007, her salary decreased from $14.50 an hour to $10.00 
hourly (AE C, D). In 2008, she had been making about $1,200 per month as a 
receptionist (Tr. 60). When she became unemployed, she received unemployment 
compensation; however, it was insufficient to kept their debts current (Tr. 61). In July 
2004, Applicant petitioned for bankruptcy and his unsecured debts were discharged in 
October 2004 (Tr. 50-51; SOR ¶ 4.a, GE 10; AE A). The SOR listed two delinquent 
debts that were discharged in the 2004 bankruptcy: $1,084 reported on a credit report 
as delinquent in March 2004 (Tr. 52-54; SOR ¶ 4.b, GE 6, 10; AE A), and $2,030 
reported delinquent on a credit report in June 2004 (Tr. 52-53; SOR ¶ 4.c, GE 10).   
 
Applicant’s first mortgage in the approximate amount of $187,057 and second 
mortgage in the approximate amount of $46,800 became delinquent in February 2008 
(SOR ¶¶ 4.d and 4.e). His monthly payments on the two accounts totaled $2,375 (Tr. 
70). In his SOR response, dated around September 26, 2008, he said he has placed his 
two mortgages under a short sale transaction and predicted it would be “settle[d] or 
solved within 2 to 3 months” (GE 10). As of December 9, 2008, Applicant’s agent was 
looking for someone to purchase his residence at a suitable price (Tr. 54). Applicant has 
not made any payments on his mortgages since February 2008 (Tr. 55). First he sent 
the mortgage holders a letter asking to readjust the mortgage to lower payments and 
then he sent a letter and short sale assignment indicating he wanted to resolve the 
debts with a short sale (Tr. 56-57; AE B, C, D). The mortgage holders have not replied 
to his short sale proposal (Tr. 58). 
 
In January 2007, Applicant completed a personal financial statement (PFS) as 
part of an Office of Personnel Management interview, indicating he had negative 
monthly net income of $850 (Tr. 67, GE 5). After completing this PFS, his financial 
situation became worse as his spouse became unemployed (Tr. 67). He has taken two 
loans out for about $15,000 against his 401K program, which he valued at about 
$30,000 (Tr. 69). He is attempting to repay his 401K program (Tr. 69).   
 
In January 2008, Applicant began a financial counseling program, which 
addressed 13 debts totaling $10,924 with monthly payments of $410 (Tr. 62-66; SOR ¶ 
1.f, GE 10). As of November 2008, the balance owed on this program was $10,415 (AE 
E). His car payments and insurance are not part of this program (Tr. 66). Even though 
Applicant was saving $2,375 per month by not paying his mortgages (which was 
substantially more than the $1,200 monthly his wife was receiving before she became 
unemployed), they still had negative income each month (Tr. 71). His mortgagees have 
not foreclosed on his residence. His wife is currently employed (Tr. 73). 
  
 
 
6 
 
Recommendation 
 
Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) described Applicant as a “model 
employee, as asset to the corporation and an exemplary citizen.  .  .  . [His] personal 
conduct, trustworthiness, reliability and honesty have [led] to a steady progression of 
promotion to higher levels of responsibility and expectation by his supervisors and 
management” (AE F). His FSO opined that Applicant had taken necessary actions to 
correct his financial problems and recommended approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance (AE F).       
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
 
7 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
   
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude relevant security concern are under Guidelines C (Foreign 
Preference), B (Foreign Influence), F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal 
Conduct).  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. These conditions state, “10(a) exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a 
current foreign passport.” 
 
Applicant renewed his Cuban passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He 
continues to possess a Cuban passport that will continue to be valid until 2012, 
establishing AG ¶ 10(a)(1). “Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a 
security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008) (citing 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990)). Because the government has 
 
 
8 
 
                                           
raised financial considerations security concerns, the burden now shifts to Applicant to 
establish any appropriate mitigating conditions. Directive ¶ E3.1.15.       
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Security officials did not authorize 
Applicant’s possession or use of his Cuban passport, and he did not invalidate or 
relinquish his Cuban passport as described in AG ¶¶ 11(d) and 11(e).4 His Cuban 
passport was not surrendered to his security officer. He obtained and used the Cuban 
passport after he became a U.S. citizen.  If he had surrendered his Cuban passport to 
his FSO, as he offered to do, I would have mitigated foreign preference security 
concerns under AG ¶ 11(e); however, because he did not do so, this security concern 
cannot be mitigated.     
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
 
4In the decretal paragraph, I find “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.c because all 
foreign preference security concerns relate to his possession and use of a currently valid Cuban passport. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c are essentially restatements of this security concern and those comments are hereby 
merged into SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 
9 
 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s grandmother, three uncles and five cousins, are citizens and 
residents of Cuba. Applicant visited his Cuban relatives in 2006 for a week. He spoke to 
his grandmother on the telephone about three times per year on holidays, when his 
father telephoned her. His relatives may have connections to the Cuban government or 
military. For example, his grandmother may be receiving a pension from the Cuban 
government. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members. See ISCR Case No. 01-03120 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 20, 2002). However, his grandmother, uncles and cousins are not immediate 
family members and this presumption does not apply. Since 1990, he has only gone to 
Cuba on one occasion, and then only stayed for a week.     
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. Cuba’s hostile relationship to the United 
States, Cuba’s failure to adhere to human rights standards, Cuba’s support of terrorists, 
 
 
10 
 
and Cuba’s espionage targeting of the United States, place a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with family members living in Cuba do not pose a security risk and he is not in a position 
to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and his family living in 
Cuba. With the ongoing hostile relationship between Cuba and the United States, it is 
conceivable that Cuban intelligence officials would target any Cuban citizen or former 
Cuban citizen living in Cuba or the United States in an attempt to gather valuable 
information from the United States. 
 
There is evidence that Cuban intelligence officials seek classified information 
from the United States. Applicant’s connections to his family members living in Cuba 
create a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to 
raise a possible security concern about his desire to help these relatives living in Cuba 
by providing classified information.    
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationships and 
contacts with his family members living in Cuba to raise the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. There is clear evidence that Cuba remains a lawless 
totalitarian state, and Applicant’s family living in Cuba are available should Cuban 
officials seek to exploit them to obtain classified information. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, 
requiring further review and analysis.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
 
 
11 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) cannot be applied with respect to his family members living 
in Cuba. Applicant has an emotional bond with his family members living in Cuba, and 
through his parents with his family, living in Cuba. Applicant communicates with them 
sufficiently to negate these mitigating conditions. Additionally, he was reluctant to turn-in 
his Cuban passport because he wanted it to be available should there be an emergency 
for the family living in Cuba. Although Applicant’s close relationships with his parents 
and his family members living in Cuba are an important positive reflection of his 
character, these same close relationships raise security concerns for possible foreign 
influence.       
 
There is no evidence that his family members living in Cuba have been political 
activists or that they have high profile jobs with the Cuban government, the military or 
any news media. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals or the Cuban 
Government have approached or threatened Applicant’s family members living in Cuba 
for any reason. There is no evidence that these family members living in Cuba currently 
engage in activities which would bring attention to them or that they or other terrorists or 
other anti-U.S. elements are even aware of Applicant’s relationship with those family 
members. As such, there is a reduced possibility that these relatives would be targets 
for coercion or exploitation.  
 
Applicant’s relationships with his relatives in Cuba, his frequent contacts with his 
parents (who frequently contact family members in Cuba) and Applicant’s somewhat 
frequent contacts with his grandmother living in Cuba, and the adversarial nature of the 
United States’ relationship with the Cuban government, all weigh against mitigating 
security concerns. See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) 
(finding contacts with siblings in PRC “once every two or three  months” not to be casual 
and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (finding 
contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 times per year not 
casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) 
(finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months not casual and 
infrequent).     
 
Applicant’s close relationship with his two children, parents and three sisters 
living in the United States and his strong connections to the United States developed 
over the last 18 years tend to mitigate foreign interest security concerns. Applicant has 
“such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” His spouse and 
children are U.S. citizens, and they all reside in the United States. He and his spouse 
 
 
12 
 
are fully inculcated with U.S. values.  He has many friends and colleagues in the United 
States. He is a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. He has provided a statement from his FSO 
corroborating his loyalty and trustworthiness. Applicant has worked for the same 
government contractor with dedication and distinction for 12 years. He has made 
significant contributions to national security and his company. All these circumstances 
demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign 
power, terrorist group, or insurgent group at coercion or exploitation. I conclude AG ¶ 
8(b) is established and mitigates foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) provides, “Applicant’s credit 
report was sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case that Applicant had . 
.  .  SOR delinquent debts that are of security concern.” Applicant’s history of delinquent 
debt is documented in his credit report, his 2006 security clearance application and his 
SOR response. Applicant’s SOR alleged four delinquent debts. Two SOR debts were 
discharged by Applicant’s 2004 bankruptcy. However, Applicant’s first and second 
mortgage total $233,857. He failed to make any mortgage payments for the last nine 
months, accruing an additional $20,000 in delinquent debt. Even though he is not 
paying his mortgage, and his wife is now employed, they have a negative cash flow 
each month. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c).  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
 
13 
 
                                           
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of any mitigating conditions. His 
financial problems are not isolated because he currently has two large delinquent debts 
totaling about $250,000. The ongoing nature of his delinquent debts is “a continuing 
course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-
11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 
2002)). Moreover, I am not convinced his debts “occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [her] current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” He discharged his delinquent debts in 2004 using 
bankruptcy, and now has even much more delinquent debt than he had in 2004. 
Although he has been paying some of his debts, he has failed to make any payments 
on his mortgages for the last nine months.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant’s spouse’s intermittent unemployment contributed to 
their financial problems. The substantial reduction in home values is another significant 
problem. As such some of their debts are due to forces beyond their control. However, 
he did not provide sufficient information to establish that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances or made sufficient efforts to address his delinquent debts.5 He receives 
some credit for informing his creditors that he was not going to pay his mortgages and 
for seeking a short sale; however, even though he was not paying his mortgages he still 
had a negative cash flow and his extensive debts are increasing. Because of his 
spouse’s periodic unemployment and the significant decline in home values, AG ¶ 10(b) 
partially mitigates financial considerations security concerns.     
 
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with his or her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
 
14 
 
                                           
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not fully apply. Applicant received financial counseling. 
However, there are no indications that “that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control” because the amount of delinquent debt is increasing more than $2,000 every 
month. There is insufficient information to establish that Applicant showed good faith6 in 
the resolution of his delinquent SOR debts because he did not establish that his failure 
to pay his delinquent debts was reasonable and necessary under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant did not dispute his responsibility for 
any debts. I conclude Applicant’s overall conduct in regard to his delinquent debts casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He failed to resolve 
or pay his mortgages. He failed to make partial payments on his mortgages. He did not 
provide good cause for his failure to pay or at least to set up payment plans and make 
some payments despite having an opportunity to do so. Based on my evaluation of the 
record evidence as a whole, I conclude financial considerations are not mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. . . . 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
15 
 
                                           
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
SOR ¶ 3.a alleges Applicant falsely denied on his 2006 security clearance 
application that he did not have a foreign passport. Applicant admitted that he had a 
Cuban passport.    
 
AG ¶ 17(f) provides one condition that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case, “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” 
Applicant disclosed his birth in Cuba and his status as a dual citizen on his 2006 
security clearance application. He understood the term “foreign” in relation to his 
passport to request information about passports from countries other than Cuba or the 
United States. I specifically find Applicant’s description of his state of mind when he 
completed his security clearance application to be credible. AG ¶ 17(f) applies to 
Applicant’s failure to disclose his possession of a Cuban passport on his security 
clearance application. This failure was not deliberate, and the allegation of falsification 
is unsubstantiated.7 
  
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
 
16 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I hereby incorporate all of my comments 
under the preceding discussions of the four pertinent adjudicative guidelines into this 
section.  
There is some evidence tending to mitigate Applicant’s conduct under the whole 
person concept. He has much greater connections to the United States than to Cuba, 
and I am confident he would resolve any conflict in favor of United States interests. His 
dedication to his work and his country is a very positive indication of his good character 
and trustworthiness. He is loyal to his country. Applicant’s record of good employment 
and law-abiding character weighs in his favor. There is no evidence of any security 
violation, or criminal activity. He received financial counseling. Some of his financial 
problems arose from his spouse’s periodic unemployment. His non-SOR debts are 
current and being paid, or in a payment plan. These factors show some responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept and the adjudicative 
guidelines are not sufficient to warrant access to classified information. His debts were 
discharged in 2004 utilizing bankruptcy. The overall amount of unresolved debt is about 
$250,000 and substantial. He has been continuously employed for 12 years, and his 
wife’s intermittently unemployment does not account for the magnitude of their 
delinquent debt. When she has been employed, her income has been about $15,000 
per year. Even when she was employed, and they were not making their monthly 
mortgage payments of $2,375; they still had a negative monthly cash flow. Applicant 
has been aware of the security significance of his delinquent SOR debts since he 
received the SOR in August 2008, and his offer to resolve his delinquent mortgages 
with the short sale of his residence in June 2008 is an inadequate attempt to resolve 
these debts.  
 
The foreign preference security concern is substantial. After becoming a U.S. 
citizen in 1996, Applicant renewed his Cuban passport in 2006. He used his Cuban 
passport for his 2006 visit to Cuba for one week. He did not relinquish or surrender his 
Cuban passport to his facility security official (FSO). Even if he had relinquished his 
Cuban passport to his FSO, I would still deny his access to classified information 
because of his financial problems.      
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
financial considerations and foreign preference security concerns. Foreign influence and 
personal conduct security concerns are mitigated.      
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
 
 
17 
 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
