1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-05374
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
     
                             
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 10,
2007. On September 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 24, 2008. He
answered the SOR in writing and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
Response to SOR.1
GE 1 (Security clearance application) at 6, 7; Tr. 44-46, 59. His parents are in the process of divorcing. 2
Tr. 33, 47, 62-64.3
2
DOHA received the request on October 16, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on October 27, 2008, and I received the case assignment on October 28, 2008.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 2008, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on November 20, 2008. The government offered four exhibits (GE) 1 through
4, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified
on his own behalf. He did not submit any exhibits at the hearing. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 1, 2008. I held the record open until
December 5, 2008, for Appellant to submit additional matters.  On December 4, 2008,
he submitted eight exhibits, Appellant Exhibit (AE) A through H, without objection. The
record closed on December 5, 2008.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on November 8, 2008. (Tr. 9.) I advised
Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive this notice 15 days
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice. (Tr. 9.) 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, received on October 16, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d of the SOR. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶
1.a, 1.b and 1.e of the SOR.   1
Applicant is 26 years old. He was born in Switzerland to Iranian parents. He
immigrated to the United States (U.S.) with his parents in 1984 and along with his
parents, became a U.S. citizen in 1993. He is fluent in Farsi. He is single and engaged
to be married. His mother continues to reside in the U.S., but his father resides in
England. His speaks with his father every two or three months.2
As he grew up, his parents encouraged him to attend the best college that
accepted him for enrollment. He graduated from high school in 1999 at age 17. He
enrolled in a prestigious and expensive private university as expected by his parents.
His parents provided him with some spending money while in college, but did not pay
his tuition, books and housing as they lacked the financial resources. To finance his
education, he borrowed money through the federal government and private education
loans. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in psychology in 2003 with plans to
attend medical school. He estimated he borrowed $110,000 in federal and private
education loans to pay for this education.   3
Tr. 34, 62.4
GE 2 (Interrogatories to Applicant and his answer with attachments) at 52-54; Tr. 36-38, 60-61.5
GE 2, supra  5, at 50; GE 3 (Credit report, dated November 7, 2008) at 21; AE B (Copy of bank statements);6
AE C (Copies of cancelled checks) at 1, 3, 5; AE H (Payment profile on private loan); Tr. 25-28, 32, 41. I note
that the creditor for the private loans is asking Applicant to repay his debt at the rate of $18,000 a year, which
will pay his loans in full in about four years. Such payments are difficult when an individual must pay rent, buy
food and meet other ordinary living expenses.
3
Because he believed he needed additional education to go to medical school,
Applicant enrolled as a part-time student in a master’s degree program at another
private university in another city. His classes began in September 2003 and he
graduated in August 2008 with a master’s degree in Public Health Administration. He
borrowed approximately $60,000 through the federal education loan program to pay for
this education. He worked full-time while working on his master’s degree.4
In September 2008, Applicant learned that he was being restructured out of his
job, which ended on September 30, 2008. He began receiving $380 a week in
unemployment in October 2008. He started a new job in pharmaceutical sales on
December 1, 2008 at a salary of $62,000 a year plus a bonus. He estimates that his net
pay will be approximately $3,500 a month, which is about $1,000 more than his net pay
in his last job. He has $600 a month in income from another source. If he has a security
clearance, his fluency in Farsi would enable him to earn significantly more money at
another company.5
Applicant’s monthly expenses total $2,839, including $569 in school loan
payments. His salary was being garnished at his last job at the rate of $448 a month.
The garnishment was for one of his federal loans. By the time his job ended, he had
paid approximately $3,600 on this garnishment.
As a graduate student, most of Applicant’s federal education loans were placed
in deferment status. When he started graduate school, he believed that his private
education loans were also in deferment. He found out that he was wrong. As a result,
his two private education loans, totaling $65,000, went into default. He has attempted to
work out a payment plan for these loans, but the creditor requested a monthly payment
of $1,500, which he could not afford. He paid the remaining $1,800 private education
loan in full in November 2008.  6
Applicant has 16 federal education loans. All but two of these loans are in
forbearance, also called deferment, until May 2009. The two remaining loans are listed
as defaulted. The largest of these two loans, $17,000 is guaranteed by a state
educational services corporation. The State garnished his wages beginning in May 2008
to pay this loan. The garnishment ended when he lost his job. He also entered into a
rehabilitation plan with the State on this loan. Since May 2008, he has paid $175 a
month in addition to the garnishment amount to return this loan to good standing. He
anticipates that the loan will return to good standing in February 2009. Applicant has
GE 2, supra note 5, at 22, 53-54; AE B; AEC, supra note 6, 2, 4; Tr. 30, 40, 54..7
GE 2, supra note 5; GE 3, supra note 6; GE 4 (Credit report, dated February 13, 2007); Tr. 42-438
4
also entered into a rehabilitation program for the second loan in default. He started
paying $94 a month in May 2008 to rehabilitate this loan. He expects that this loan will
also be rehabilitated in February 2009. Once these loans are in good standing, he plans
to consolidate all his federal loans into one monthly payment. He believes that once he
rehabilitates his defaulted loans, the garnishment will end.7
Applicant denies owing the one remaining debt, a cell phone, alleged in the SOR
as he has no knowledge of the debt. The credit report he obtained in June 2008 did not
show this debt nor does the February 13, 2007 credit report. He learned about the debt
when he received the government’s proposed exhibits in this case.8
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant debt while attending
undergraduate and graduate school.  He has been unable to pay his education loan
obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions,
requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His debts are
recent and current. Thus, the mitigating condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(f) do not apply in this case. 9
6
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@  As he grew up,
Applicant=s parents instilled in him the idea that he should attend the best college he
could. Based on his upbringing, he chose a prestigious private university for his
undergraduate education. His parents advised him to borrow the funds he needed to
pay for his education, as they lacked the resources to pay. At age 17, he relied on their
advice. He was too young and inexperienced in financial matters to realize that this
advice would cause him problems later and to understand the future financial impact to
him. He made a reasonable decision based on the information given to him. He lost his
job in September 2008. Despite his job loss, he continued to pay the previously agreed
upon payment plans for his education loans. He started new employment on December
1, 2008. I find this potentially mitigating condition partially applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not contacted a credit counseling service to
help resolve his delinquent debts. He has acted on his own to resolve his debts. He
initiated a rehabilitation plan for two of his delinquent federal education loans in May
2008. He has complied with the repayment plan. He has fully resolved an $1,800 private
education loan. He, however, has been unable to resolve or develop a repayment plan
for the two delinquent private loans. He pays his monthly expenses and does not incur
any other debts as part of his daily living expenses. He is financially sound as related to
his current living expenses. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions apply only
to allegations 1. a and 1.b of the SOR.9
Applicant denies that he had an account with a cell phone carrier. Only one of the
three credit reports of record indicates that Applicant owed money to the creditor listed
in allegation 1.e of the SOR. Given Applicant’s denial, I find that the evidence of record
is insufficient to establish this debt.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
In today’s society, many college students are incurring significant educational debt as a way to finance a10
college education, whether it is a private or a public institution. The issue of excessive educational debt and
repayment will most likely come up again. 
7
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant financial problems are the
result of inappropriate advice given to him by his parents about paying for his college
education. As a result, he has accumulated more than $150,000 in private and federal
educational loans. One-half of these loans are currently in forbearance. The remaining
are in default. Applicant has enrolled in and complied with a rehabilitation payment plan
for the two federal education loans which are in default. He has also paid a small private
education loan. He continued these payments even after he lost his job, a
commendable decision on his part and an indication of his intent to pay his school
loans. He plans to consolidate all his federal loans into one once he has rehabilitated
the two loans in default. He expects this to occur sometime in the early spring. He has
not resolved the issues related to his two private education loans totaling $65,000, in
part because his income does not allow him to pay the requested $1,500 a month
payment. At this time, he is not actively working with this creditor on this problem.
Applicant has made progress in resolving his educational loan defaults, but has not
resolved all the issues raised regarding his educational debts. He has not yet
established a solid track record for paying all his education loans. Since he is still trying
to resolve some significant debt and needs to show he is committed to paying his
education loans, I find he has not mitigated the government’s security concerns about
his finances. Accordingly, I find that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from his financial considerations.10
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
