 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02909
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is denied.
On May 19, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor, where he works as a fiber optics assembler. (Gx. 1) On March 7,
2008, after reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent to Applicant
interrogatories to obtain clarification of and/or additional information about adverse
information in his background.  After reviewing the results of the background1
investigation, including his response to the interrogatories (Gx. 2), DOHA adjudicators
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with2
the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On July 23,
2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under3
Guideline F (financial considerations).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on September 24, 2008, and I convened a hearing on October 22,
2008. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented two exhibits (Gx.
1 and 2). Applicant testified and submitted one exhibit (Ax. A). I also left the record open
after the hearing to receive additional relevant information. On October 30, 2008, I
received a post-hearing submission, which is included in the record without objection as
Ax. B. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on November 6, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes approximately $22,951
for 16 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.p); and that, according to a personal financial
statement he submitted on April 29, 2008, he has a monthly net remainder after
expenses (not including repayment of any delinquencies) of approximately $282 (SOR
1.q). Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. As to SOR ¶ 1.q, the facts alleged
are relevant to this decision; however, they are not potentially disqualifying in and of
themselves. Rather, this allegation pleads relevant evidence of Applicant’s current
finances, which I have considered in reaching my decision. SOR ¶ 1.q is concluded for
the Applicant. I have also made the following additional findings of relevant fact. 
Applicant is 33 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor since
January 2006. According to his e-QIP, Applicant was unemployed for about 18 months
before he found his current job. Between February 2002 and June 2004, he worked as
a forklift operator. He also served in the United States Army Reserve from October 1996
until August 2004. (Gx. 1) 
Applicant was married from June 1997 until May 2004, when he and his wife
were officially divorced. However, Applicant and his wife actually separated after only
six months. They had one child together. Applicant also has three children by another
woman. He pays about $820 each month in child support. In 2005, two warrants for his
arrest were issued for alleged failure to pay child support as ordered; however, it does
not appear that he is currently in arrears on his child support obligations. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Tr. 42, 46)
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
Applicant’s financial difficulties date back to his failure to pay a telephone bill in
2001. (Tr. 17, 32) He acknowledges being “an idiot” in that he was not paying attention
to his debts and spending habits. (Tr. 27) Around 2004, he developed blood clots that
required hospitalization for about two weeks. At the time, he did not have health
insurance and was turned down for Medicaid coverage. He admitted that he ignored his
medical bills because he did not have the means to pay them. As a result, he still owes
approximately $6,543 for eight delinquent medical bills listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d - 1.k. He
has not contacted those creditors. (Gx. 2; Tr. 29, 35 - 36)
Of the remaining $16,408 in delinquent debts listed in the SOR, Applicant owes
approximately $15,475 for a car repossession in 2007. (SOR ¶ 1.o) Applicant had
financed a car and made about four payments before he went on extended travel for his
job. He left the car with a girlfriend for her to use, and he sent her money with which he
expected her to make the monthly payments. She used the car as her own, but did not
make any payments. Applicant has not contacted this creditor; nor has he taken any
steps to resolve this debt, which he estimates is now at least $18,000. (Gx. 2; Tr. 29 -
30, 48 - 54)
The remaining seven delinquent debts total $923. Applicant has repaid one of the
debts, a $169 corporate credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.m). The debt was satisfied only
after it grew to over $5,000 and his wages were garnished starting in November 2007.
The last payment was scheduled for the Friday after this hearing. The remaining six
debts total $754, an average of $126 per account. Applicant has not contacted any of
these creditors or taken any action to resolve these debts. (Gx. 2; Ax. B; Tr. 32 - 33)
According to letters of reference from two co-workers and a supervisor, Applicant
is a good, reliable employee. The letters presented do not reflect any knowledge of the
adverse information about his finances. (Ax. A) Applicant loves his job and wants to
resolve his finances because he now realizes the importance of good credit. (Tr. 18, 27
- 28)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
 See footnote 4, supra.8
 See footnote 7, supra. 9
5
The government presented sufficient information to support all of the allegations
in SOR ¶ 1. Available information also shows Applicant has not paid or resolved any of
the debts listed therein. Some of the debts have been delinquent for up to seven years.
Applicant acknowledged willful neglect of his finances and has yet to contact any of his
creditors to pay or resolve even the most modest of his debts. He also demonstrated
poor judgment regarding his car loan obligation. The record in this case requires
application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), at AG ¶ 19(b) (indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible
spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt) and at AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting
financial obligations).
In response, Applicant has not presented any information that would support
application of any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20. His financial problems are
recent, in that they remain unresolved. As to his medical debts, they arguably were due
to circumstances beyond his control. However, because he has decided to ignore them,
he may not benefit from the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b)(the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant
has not made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. In fact, the one debt he has paid
was through involuntary wage deductions for a delinquent corporate credit card. He has
not sought any financial counseling or other assistance that would help him improve his
personal financial condition. In summary, Applicant has failed to overcome the adverse
information about his finances.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 33 years old and
presumed to be a mature adult. However, he has demonstrated since at least 2001 a
complete disregard for his personal financial affairs, including at times his child support
obligations. While there is positive information about his job performance, there is no
positive information about his current finances or to show he knows how to manage his
money better now than before. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available8
information shows Applicant has not satisfied the doubts about his suitability for access
to classified information that are established by the results of the government’s
investigation. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.9
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a - 1.p: Against Applicant
 Subparagraph 1.q: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
