 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 08-00510 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), H (Drug Involvement) and J (Criminal 
Conduct). His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 17, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under the guidelines for Financial Considerations, Drug Involvement and 
Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On July 7, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 17, 2008, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy. Applicant signed the document 
acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM on September 29, 2008, and returned it 
to DOHA. He provided no further response to the FORM within the 30-day period he 
was given to do so, did not request additional time to respond, and made no objection to 
consideration of any evidence submitted by Department Counsel. I received the case 
assignment on December 12, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in Paragraph 1 
of the SOR, except those contained in ¶ 1.g and ¶ 1.i that he denied. He admitted all 
allegations contained in Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the SOR. All admissions are 
incorporated into the findings herein.   
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and recently divorced from his second wife. He has a 
ten-year-old son. In March 2007, he began working as a customer service 
representative for a defense contractor. Prior to this position, he worked for other 
federal contractors. In August 2007, he submitted an e-QIP. (Item 5.) 
 
 In April 2008, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories relating to his finances 
and drug use.  He attributed his financial problems to medical expenses related to a 
neck injury and his recent divorce from his second wife.  He noted that “I intend to make 
arrangements for payment on all debts.” (Item 6 at 44.) The May 2008 SOR alleged that 
he has nine delinquent debts, totaling $24,006. According to a September 2007 credit 
bureau report (CBR), one of the debts, a tax lien, was filed in 2002. He admitted that he 
owed all but $13,456 of the alleged debts, specifically denying the tax lien for $465 and 
a credit union account of $13,000. Said CBR notes that the tax lien is outstanding, but 
the credit union debt is paid. (Item 7.) He did not provide any information regarding the 
resolution of the remaining $11,000 of delinquent debt or the tax lien. 
   
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he used marijuana on a regular 
basis from April 2001 to September 15, 2007, and used cocaine on a regular basis from 
mid-2000 to March 2001. (Item 4.) He stopped using marijuana after his second arrest 
for possession of it in September 2007. He was previously arrested for possession of 
some other type of controlled substance in March 2001 and in April 2001 for possession 
of marijuana.1 (Item 6 at 39.) He pled guilty to the April 2001 charge and was sentenced 
to pay a fine.  He was sentenced to pay a $589 fine on the September 2007 charge. 
 
 As of February 2007, Applicant terminated his relationship with those friends with 
whom he engaged in illegal drug abuse, and later his second wife, who he said is an 
“addict and is a bad influence on me and my child.” (Item 6 at 40.) There is no evidence 
                                                          
1 The drug charges, along with a domestic abuse charge, filed in March 2001, were entered nolle 
prosequi by the State. 
 
3 
 
 
that he participated in any substance abuse treatment for either his cocaine or 
marijuana abuse. He acknowledged that his employer utilizes a drug screening 
program, although he has never been tested. (Id. at 40.) “Since 9/15/07, I realize, 
understand, and vow never again to do drugs or be associated with people, events or 
any circumstances that may be remotely associated with drugs. I’m very, very, sorry.” 
(Id. at 42.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
4 
 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant began accumulating a significant amount of delinquent debt that he has 
been unable or unwilling to manage or resolve since 2002. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifications, 
the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. AG ¶ 20 
provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Other than providing evidence of the resolution of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, 
Applicant did not submit evidence to trigger the application of any of the six mitigating 
conditions to the other debts. The financial problems are on-going, such that AG ¶ 20(a) 
cannot apply. Although there is some evidence that the debts may be attributable to 
medical expenses and a divorce, he did not submit evidence to demonstrate that he 
acted financially responsible under those circumstances, as required under AG ¶ 20(b). 
Applicant has not received credit counseling or initiated a good-faith effort to repay or 
resolve his debts, nor shown that his finances are under control, all of which are 
necessary to trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d). Nor is there any 
evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(e) or AG ¶ 20(f).      
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
The security concern pertaining to drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
Based on Applicant’s admissions that he regularly used marijuana from April 
2001 to September 2007 and cocaine from mid-2000 to March 2001, the Government 
raised a disqualification under AG ¶ 25(a).  
AG ¶ 26 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
illegal drug use: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
7 
 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.   
 Based on an evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude that AG ¶ 
26(a) does not apply. Applicant used marijuana regularly from April 2001 until 
September 2007, the last incident being about a year ago. Given his 6-year history of 
marijuana use, coupled with his previous year of cocaine use, his behavior does cast 
doubt on his current trustworthiness and good judgment.   
Applicant stated that since February 2007 he no longer associates with friends or 
his ex-wife who used illegal drugs. As those assertions are not corroborated by any 
independent evidence, only limited application of AG ¶ 26(b) is warranted. The record 
does not contain evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 26(c) or AG ¶ 26(d). 
Applicant has not sought professional treatment, an evaluation or received a favorable 
prognosis from a qualified medical professional.  
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this instance: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
Applicant repeatedly engaged in illegal substance abuse over a period of 
more than six years and was arrested on three separate occasions for illegally 
possessing drugs, resulting in two convictions. The Government raised the above 
two disqualifications.  
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline: 
 
8 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant admitted that the last time he used marijuana was in September 
2007, and the last time he used cocaine was in April 2001. Given that the last 
time he used marijuana was about a year ago and that he did not submit any 
independent evidence to verify his assertions, AG ¶ 32(a) is not applicable. 
Applicant was not coerced into using illegal drugs, so AG ¶ 32(b) has no 
application. AG ¶ 32(c) does not apply because Applicant’s admissions and 
criminal record support the allegations regarding his illegal drug offenses. 
Despite a long history of serious substance abuse, Applicant has not sought any 
form of professional substance abuse rehabilitation, which would be pertinent to 
the allegations raised under this guideline and Guideline H. Although he stated 
remorse over his previous conduct, it is insufficient to outweigh his history of 
criminal conduct considering that he used illegal drugs while working for the 
federal government that has a drug-free policy, and after completing a security 
clearance application. AG ¶ 32(d) has no application.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each 
guideline, the adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all 
available, reliable information about the applicant, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision. The essence of scrutinizing all appropriate 
variables in a case is referred to as the “whole person” analysis. In evaluating the 
conduct of the applicant, the administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 32-year-old man, who 
began using marijuana in 2001 and continued using it until September 2007, after he 
completed an e-QIP that inquires into ones illegal drug abuse. In addition, he also used 
cocaine from mid-2000 to March 2001. While I find his candid admissions of his drug 
use noteworthy, his assertions that he will not use illegal drugs in the future are not very 
convincing in view of the absence of any evidence that he has taken steps to address 
his long history of substance abuse. The fact that he chose to use marijuana after 
submitting a security clearance application is troublesome and indicative of a lack of 
good judgment.  
 
In April 2008, Applicant stated that he intended to resolve the delinquent debts 
that were concerning the Government. Despite having a couple months to do so, he did 
not take actions to follow through on his assertion, providing another indication of his 
lack of reliability and good judgment, 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations, drug involvement and criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.b:  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.c:  Against Applicant 
    
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
