1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-00660
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
December 11, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA), on May 9, 2007.
On July 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) with attachments, in writing on July 11,
2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned
to this Administrative Judge on September 15, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing
on September 30, 2008, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 22,
2008, in Las Vegas, Nevada. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 8, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and two additional
witnesses testified for her. She submitted Exhibits A through J, which were entered into
2
evidence without objection.  I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
October 29, 2008, to submit additional matters.  She timely submitted additional
documents, identified and entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits K through
N, and the record closed on October 29, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant
and the other two witnesses, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the
following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 48 years old. She is currently unmarried, and she has four children.
Applicant is employed by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 14 allegations of overdue debts, 1.a. through 1.n., under
Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the debts will be discussed in the same order as they
were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $201.
Applicant testified that this debt has been paid, and Exhibit E confirms that this debt has
been paid. The most current credit report (cr) also confirms that this debt has been paid
(Exhibit 8). 
1.b. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $62.
Applicant testified that this debt has been paid, and the most current cr also confirms
that this debt has been paid (Exhibit 8). 
1.c. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $770.
Applicant testified that this debt has been paid, although she had no documentation to
prove it. While it is not clear, it appears that Exhibit 8 also shows that this debt has been
resolved.  
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $68.
Applicant testified that she has contacted the collection agency for this debt, but they
did not have a record of her owing this debt. She indicated that she was planning to pay
the debt, but has been unable to do so.  I conclude that this debt has not been paid in
full, but not as a result of Applicant’s wrongful action.   
 
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $233 for
a medical bill. In her RSOR, Applicant stated that she had paid this bill, and she was
3
waiting for a proof of payment to be sent to her. Exhibit 8 shows that a payment of $233
was made for a medical bill, so it appears that this debt has been resolved. 
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $12,222
for a judgement for child support. In her RSOR and during her testimony, Applicant
reiterated that this debt has been paid. Her attachment to the RSOR, and Exhibit 8
confirm that this debt has been paid.
1.g. This overdue debt to Creditor 7 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $427. In
her RSOR and during her testimony, Applicant reiterated that this debt has been paid.
Her attachment to the RSOR, and Exhibit 8 confirm that this debt has been paid.
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 8 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $164. In
her RSOR and during her testimony, Applicant reiterated that this debt has been paid.
Her post hearing submission confirms that this debt has been paid (Exhibit L).
1.i. This overdue debt to Creditor 9 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,460.
This debt arose, because a vehicle owned by Applicant was towed and stored. She did
not remember that the vehicle had been towed, and the fee for the towing and storage
continued to grow. Applicant estimated the value of this old vehicle at either $600 or
$700. She has contacted this creditor, but thus far they refuse to negotiate a more
reasonable amount for settlement, even though the creditor has retained the vehicle.
She indicated that she will attempt to renegotiate the debt again so that she may
resolve the debt.   
1.j. This overdue debt to Creditor 10 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $491. In
her RSOR and during her testimony, Applicant reiterated that this debt has been paid.
However, no documentation was introduced to confirm that this debt has been paid.
1.k. This overdue debt to Creditor 11 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $713.
In her RSOR and during her testimony, Applicant reiterated that this debt has been
paid. Her attachment to the RSOR, and Exhibit B confirm that this debt has been paid.
1.l. This overdue debt to Creditor 12 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$21,116. In her RSOR and during the hearing, Applicant testified that this debt is for a
vehicle that is in the possession of her ex-boyfriend. While they were together, she and
this boyfriend had made an agreement that he would use the vehicle that had been
purchased in her name, as long as he made the payments on the vehicle. After they
separated, he stopped making the required monthly payments, but he refused to return
the vehicle to her, and as far as she is aware, the vehicle is still in his possession. While
she is still legally responsible for the payments of this debt, she has contacted both the
creditor and the police to attempt to explain and resolve this debt. She testified that she
was informed by the creditor that they would attempt to work out a payment plan with
her ex-boyfriend, but apparently they did not do so. Applicant indicted in her RSOR that
she intended to file a civil suit against her ex-boyfriend to recover the amount owed  for
this debt. 
4
1.m. This overdue debt to Creditor 13 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $200.
In her RSOR and during her testimony, Applicant reiterated that this debt has been
paid. No documentation was introduced to confirm that this debt has been paid.
However, since this debt is not included in the most current cr, it may have been
resolved (Exhibit 8).
1.n. This overdue debt to Creditor 14 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $373. 
In her RSOR and during her testimony, Applicant reiterated that this debt has been
paid. Exhibits I and 8 confirm that this debt has been paid.
1.o. This allegation was amended at the time of the hearing, and struck from the
SOR, with no objections raised from either party. I find that the allegation regarding
what evidence Applicant introduced about each debt, is a question for me to resolve,
and that is how it has been addressed.  
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
2.a. In 1997, Applicant was charged with fraud to obtain over $400, perjury, and
grand theft over $400, for her failure to inform her social worker that she had become
married.
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she had initially left telephonic messages
to the social worker to inform her that she had become married, but the social worker
did not contact her, and Applicant simply never followed up to inform her of the
marriage.  She appeared in court and pled no contest to a lesser charge, and she was
ordered to repay public assistance benefits that she had wrongfully received in the
amount of $400. She was not sentenced to any other restrictions or punishment.
Applicant testified that she was not aware that she received a payment to which she
was not entitled. 
2.b. In 2004, Applicant was sued and found liable for unpaid child support.
Applicant explained that her daughter had lived with her until she was 13 or 14, and
eventually she moved in with Applicant’s ex-sister-in-law. Applicant was providing some
money for her daughter’s support, but the ex-sister-in-law requested additional child
support from the court, which Applicant was ordered to pay. As reviewed in paragraph
1.f., above, Applicant has resolved this debt. 
2.c. Applicant executed a signed SCA on May 9, 2007 (Exhibit 1). Question 28.a.
asks, “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”
Question 28.b. asks, “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”
Applicant answered “No” to both of these questions, and she listed no debts. The
Government alleges that Applicant should have included the debts listed as 1.a. through
1.n., discussed above in the SOR.
Applicant testified that she was confused about these questions, and she is not
certain why she answered “No” to both of these questions. She testified credibly that
5
she had no intention of hiding information from the Government when she completed
the SCA (Tr at 78-82).
Applicant explained that she and her fiancée drive a long distance truck together.
They have been together for two years, and he has helped her to resolve her finances.
They pay their debts together, and they are not overdue on any of their current debts.
They each submitted post hearing income and expense statements that show a
remainder of approximately $2,000 a month each after net income and expenses are
tabulated (Exhibit N). Applicant testified that her previous financial difficulties were
incurred primarily because as a mother of four children she did not have sufficient funds
to pay all of her debts. She also conceded that at times she was not as thorough as she
should have been to make sure the debts  were resolved.   
Two witnesses testified at the hearing on Applicant’s behalf, her daughter and
her fiance.  Applicant’s daughter, who is now 25 years old, testified that she lived with
her aunt (Applicant’s ex-sister-in-law) for eight or nine months and that during that time
her mother continued to give her aunt $200 a month for her and to pay for her clothes
and food.  There was no explanation for why the court ordered Applicant  to pay her ex-
sister-in-law the $12,222, as reviewed in paragraph 1.f., above. She also confirmed that
Applicant’s ex-boyfriend has retained the vehicle, of which the purchase agreement was
in Applicant’s name, and he has not returned it. 
Applicant’s fiancé testified that they have driven a truck together for the last two
years, and they also pay their bills together. He reiterated that together they are able to
resolve all of their debts, and they do not have any current overdue bills. They plan to
marry in December 2008. 
Finally, Applicant submitted four character letters from individuals who have
known Applicant in a variety of settings (Exhibit M). They were all very positive
describing Applicant as “dependable,” and “hard  working.”  She also submitted a letter
from the minister of her church, who wrote that Applicant and her fiancé were enrolled in
a pre-marital counseling program with the stated intention of being married in December
of 2008. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
6
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government has established that Applicant has had a history of financial
difficulties and overdue debts.
Regarding the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline F, I conclude both
DC (a) and DC (c) apply, because of Applicant’s history of not meeting financial
obligations and her previous inability or unwillingness to satisfy her debts. 
However, I find that Mitigating Condition (MC) (d) applies as Applicant has
initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue creditors and resolve her debts. She
7
also is not overdue on any of her current debts. I, therefore, hold Guideline F for
Applicant.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, I find that Applicant testified credibly that she did not
knowingly provide incorrect material information to the Government on the SCA that she
executed on May 9, 2007. I also find that the $400 that she wrongfully received in 1997
was not due to any illegal or improper conduct. Finally, it is not clear why the court
ordered Applicant to pay such a substantial amount of child support in 2004, which
based on the testimony of Applicant and her daughter, appears to be unwarranted.
Regardless, Applicant has paid the full amount of child support that was ordered by the
court and fulfilled her legal requirements.  
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E,  I conclude that no DC applies against
Applicant. I therefore, resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines F and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including the testimony of her two character
witnesses and her significant attempt to resolve her overdue debts, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.n.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.c.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
