 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-03845 
                                                            )                  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.   His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted and certified an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on December 9, 2005.  On July 11, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 30, 2008 Applicant submitted a written notarized Answer to the SOR.  
On August 12, 2008, Applicant submitted a written notarized supplemental Answer to 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
the SOR.  In both documents, he requested that his case be determined on the record 
in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
September 11, 2008. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 12.  
By letter dated September 17, 2008, a copy of the FORM was forwarded to Applicant, 
with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt.  Applicant received the file on September 23, 2008.  His response was due on 
October 23, 2008. He did not submit any additional information within the required time 
period.  On November 19, 2008, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) (Item 1.) In his supplemental 
Answer to the SOR, dated August 12, 2008, Applicant admitted allegations at SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.e, and 1.f.1 He admitted the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d but 
disagreed with the total amounts of the debts alleged. He denied debts alleged at SOR 
¶¶ 1.g and 1.h.2 He also provided additional information to support his request for a 
security clearance. Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact.  (Item 
4.) 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old, married, and employed as a federal contractor. From 
August 1976 to March 1995, he served on active duty with the U.S. military. He has held 
a security clearance since at least 2001. (Item 5.) 
 
 In April 1997, Applicant petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant and his 
wife planned to make the Chapter 13 payments from their incomes.  Applicant’s wife 
suffered a heart attack and was unable to work. The petition was dismissed in 
September 1999, when Applicant failed to make required payments. In August 2002 
Applicant and his wife filed a motion to convert the Chapter 13 to a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Applicant’s motion was granted, and his Chapter 7 bankruptcy was 
discharged in December 2002.  (SOR ¶ 1.a; Item 2; Item 4; Item 7; Item 8.)   
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d that liens were filed against Applicant in 
March 2007, December 2006, and March 2004. The March 2007 lien was for $9,330; 
the December 2006 lien was for $9,215, and the March 2004 lien was for $2,394. The 
three liens were listed as unpaid on Applicant’s credit reports of March 13, 2008 and 
June 19, 2008.  The December 2006 lien of $9,215 and the March 2004 lien of $2,394 
were also listed under Applicant’s name on a September 9, 2008 print-out of State A’s 
judiciary judgments and liens. The print-out also listed a lien for $788.99, filed against 
Applicant in 2001, as satisfied.  (Item 10; Item 11; Item 12.) 
 
1 In his supplemental Answer, Applicant listed two responses to SOR ¶ 1.e.  When his responses are 
compared with the language of the SOR itself, they show that Applicant’s second response to SOR ¶ 1.e 
addresses the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f.   
2 In his supplemental Answer, Applicant listed two responses to SOR ¶ 1.g.  When his responses are 
compared with the language of the SOR itself, they show that Applicant’s second response to SOR ¶ 1.g 
addresses the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.h. 
 
3 
 
 
 
 In his Answer of July 30, 2008, and in his supplemental Answer of August 12, 
2008, Applicant acknowledged that the liens were for back taxes, and he stated that he 
was paying them off. He denied he owed the total amounts alleged in the SOR. He 
provided a document, dated June 23, 2008, from State tax authority A, reporting that he 
owed $4,654.78 in unpaid taxes for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2005.  He also 
provided a document, dated June 26, 2008, from a regional manager of a tax resolution 
firm, reporting that she had contacted State A on Applicant’s behalf and requested that 
Applicant pay the debt with monthly installments of $100. Applicant provided no other 
documents to rebut the amounts owed on the liens or to corroborate his assertion that 
he was paying the liens identified in the SOR allegations. (Item 2; Item 4) 
 
 Applicant admitted he owed $1,809 on a bad debt that had been placed for 
collection and remained unpaid as of June 19, 2008. (SOR ¶ 1.e) He further stated he 
had sent the creditor a payment on the account.  He provided no documentation to 
corroborate his statement that he had sent a payment to the creditor. (Item 1; Item 4; 
Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant also admitted a charged-off medical debt of $43 that remained unpaid 
as of June 19, 2008. (SOR ¶ 1.f.) He stated his intent to pay the debt in full after he had 
identified the creditor.  (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant denied a debt of approximately $500 and asserted he had paid it on 
March 19, 2008.  To corroborate his payment of the debt, he provided a photocopy of 
his bank statement showing a payment of $500 made to a creditor on March 18, 2008.  
Applicant’s documentation was insufficient to show that he had paid the creditor 
identified on the SOR.  However, his credit report of June 19, 2008, shows the debt 
identified at SOR ¶ 1.g as settled.  (Item 4; Item 11 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant also denied a charged-off debt of approximately $14,078 that had not 
been paid as of March 15, 2008.  (SOR ¶ 1.h.)  In his Answer to the SOR and in his 
supplemental Answer to the SOR, he acknowledged he had financed a vehicle through 
the creditor identified in the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.h. He stated that the payments on the 
vehicle were causing him to fall into debt, and he therefore gave the vehicle up to the 
creditor as a voluntary repossession.  (Item 1; Item 2; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant responded to financial interrogatories from DOHA on May 27, 2008. He 
provided a sworn statement reporting that his annual gross income from salary and 
military retirement pay was approximately $91,000.  His net monthly income from salary 
was $5,210. He reported an additional $600 in net monthly income from military 
retirement pay. He listed $3,185 in fixed monthly expenses.  He reported that he was 
making monthly payments on two current financial obligations which totaled 
approximately $669. Additionally, he reported a monthly net remainder of $1,955. (Item 
6 at 7.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 The record does not indicate that Applicant has participated in consumer credit 
counseling.   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties. In 1999, he declared Chapter 
13 bankruptcy, which was dismissed for non-payment in 2002.  Later in 2002, he moved 
to convert his Chapter 13 to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  In December 2002, his debts 
were discharged in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Despite the fresh start afforded by his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, Applicant acquired additional financial delinquencies, most 
notably several tax liens and a deficiency resulting from a voluntary repossession of an 
automobile. These obligations indicate he has substantial delinquent debt and is unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise the potentially 
disqualifying conditions identified above, requiring a closer examination. 
 
Guideline F also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might be 
 
6 
 
 
applicable include evidence the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control (AG ¶ 20(c)) or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. (AG ¶ 20 (d))  
 
Applicant stated that he was unable to follow through on his Chapter 13 
payments in 1999 because his wife suffered a heart attack and was unable to work. 
While Applicant’s wife’s health problems were unfortunate and unpredictable, they 
occurred nine years ago. In his Answer and supplemental Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
did not report further family health problems. However, his financial problems have 
continued, even though his annual gross income is over $90,000 a year and his monthly 
net remainder is approximately $1,955. 
 
 The record corroborates Applicant’s statement that he satisfied the $500 medical 
debt alleged at SOR ¶1.g.   
 
Applicant promised to pay the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f at some time in the 
future, when he had identified the creditor. He failed to provide documentation to 
corroborate his assertion that he was paying the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. He also 
failed to rebut the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d that he owed over $20,000 in 
liens that had not been satisfied as of June 19, 2008.  He failed to establish that he was 
not responsible for a debt, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h, of approximately $14,078 which 
resulted from a voluntary repossession of an automobile he had purchased on credit.           
 
The record does not show that Applicant has participated in financial counseling. 
While he admitted some of his financial delinquencies, it was not clear that he 
understood his financial problems or how to resolve them. He appears to have sufficient 
funds remaining at the end of each month to address his financial delinquencies. Even 
so, he had no plan in place to systematically resolve his substantial delinquent debt and 
prepare for future contingencies. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part in mitigation, 
but that AG ¶ 20(a), AG ¶ 20(b), and AG ¶ 20(c) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
 
7 
 
 
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems have 
occurred in his mature adult years. (See AG & 2(a)(4).)  Since receiving a fresh financial 
start after his Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002, Applicant has continued to accumulate 
unpaid debt. He has not taken affirmative action to pay or resolve the majority of his 
delinquent debts, and this continues to raise security concerns. While he deserves 
credit for payment his medical debt of $500, he has not demonstrated that he has used 
his remaining monthly discretionary income to satisfy his many other remaining old 
debts.  (See AG & 2(a)(6).)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.h:             Against Applicant 
    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
