 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-01006 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for continued access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 26, 2007. On July 
21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines G and J. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 6, 2008; answered it on 
August 20, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on August 21, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 25, 2008, and the case was assigned to me the following day. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on October 2, 2008, scheduling the hearing for October 28, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented 
the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through S, 
which were admitted without objection. The record closed on October 28, 2008. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on November 6, 2008. 
 
Request for Continuance 
 
 On October 2, 2008, Applicant requested that his hearing be postponed until the 
second week of December 2008, in order to be represented by an attorney who is a 
friend of the family (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I). On the same day, I informed Applicant that I 
would not postpone the hearing based on the information provided. I told Applicant I 
needed an entry of appearance from his intended attorney and a detailed justification for 
lengthy delay he had requested (HX II). On October 23, 2008, I reminded Applicant of 
my earlier ruling (HX III), and he replied that he would not be represented by an attorney 
and that he was ready to proceed on the scheduled date (HX IV; Tr. 56). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-f and 
2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old aviation mechanic employed by a defense contractor. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from January 1997 until January 
2002, and he has worked for his current employer since leaving active duty. He held a 
clearance during his Marine Corps service and retained it when he was hired by his 
current employer (Tr. 15). He was separated from active duty under honorable 
conditions and received the Good Conduct Medal (AX A at 2). 
 
 In 1989, when Applicant was 16 or 17 years old, he was charged with assault 
after he slashed a man’s face with a bottle during a bar fight (Tr. 70-72). He testified he 
came to the defense of his older brother (Tr. 121-22). He was tried as a juvenile, fined, 
and placed on probation.  
 
In 1990, Applicant was charged with criminal mischief, disorderly conduct, and 
possession of liquor by a minor. He pleaded guilty to illegal possession of liquor and 
was placed on probation. In August 1991, he was again charged with illegal possession 
of liquor by a minor. His probation was revoked, and he served 15 days in jail (Tr. 72).  
 
 
3 
 
 
In October 1992, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence of liquor 
(DUI). He was sentenced to 60 days in jail, with all jail time suspended except 72 hours 
(Tr. 73). In 1994, he was charged with DUI and eluding the police. He pleaded guilty to 
DUI and was fined. Regarding the charge of eluding the police, he testified he was lost 
and did not realize the police were following him (Tr. 74). 
 
 In May 2001, while serving on active duty in the Marine Corps, Applicant was 
charged by civilian police with inflicting corporal injury on a cohabitant. He and his 
girlfriend had an argument, and he tried to restrain her after she slapped and scratched 
him. A neighbor called the police, who detained Applicant because he accidently struck 
her lip while they were scuffling and the police noticed her lip was bleeding. He posted 
bond and his girlfriend later picked him up at the police station. He notified his military 
commander of the incident. He was not prosecuted by military or civilian authorities (GX 
4 at 3; GX 6; Tr. 56, 78-80, 125). This incident was not alcohol-related. 
 
 In November 2003, Applicant was charged with second degree assault. He 
testified he came home late from a bachelor party and saw that his girlfriend had left 
their six-month-old son unattended. He saw his girlfriend talking to a neighbor across 
the street. He and his girlfriend began arguing, and he unintentionally knocked a cell 
phone from her hand. The neighbor, apparently believing Applicant had struck her, 
knocked him to the ground. During the ensuing struggle, Applicant defended himself by 
“choking the neighbor out” and injuring his esophagus. Applicant’s girlfriend called the 
police. Both Applicant and the neighbor were intoxicated. Applicant was placed on 
probation before judgment for 30 days and required to pay the neighbor’s $400 medical 
bill (GX 4 at 4; GX 5 at 3-6; AX S; Tr. 81-90, 127-28).   
 
In June 2005, Applicant stopped at a bar near his house and had several drinks, 
knowing he could walk home if necessary. A female bartender with whom he was 
acquainted asked him to remove her ex-boyfriend from the bar because he was causing 
a commotion. Applicant agreed to take the ex-boyfriend to another bar about three miles 
away (AX B; Tr. 56-57). Police stopped him on the way and charged him with failing to 
drive to the right of the center line, driving while impaired, and driving under the 
influence. Pursuant to his lawyer’s recommendation, he began an outpatient program 
for alcohol abuse in July 2005, while awaiting trial. He began attending AA meetings at 
about this time.  
 
In September 2005, he pleaded guilty to driving under the influence and not guilty 
to the other charges, which were disposed of by nolle prosequi. He was placed on 
probation before judgment and paid a fine (GX 4 at 5). As a condition of his probation, 
he continued his outpatient treatment for alcohol abuse until May 2006, when he 
successfully completed it. His prognosis by a licensed clinical alcohol and drug abuse 
counselor was “good.” The discharge notes stated, “No further treatment needed.” His 
primary diagnosis was alcohol abuse in early partial remission. The staff 
recommendations upon discharge were to abstain from alcohol, continue his AA 
involvement, and to stay focused on recovery (AX D). 
 
 
4 
 
 
In February and March 2006, Applicant voluntarily received inpatient treatment 
for alcohol abuse. He testified that during his outpatient treatment issues from his family 
history had surfaced and he felt they needed to be addressed with one-on-one 
counseling (Tr. 59). His mother is an alcoholic and was married four times. Applicant 
changed his last name after his mother’s first divorce and replaced his birth father’s 
name with his grandfather’s name (Tr. 70). During his inpatient treatment he was 
diagnosed by a medical doctor as alcohol dependent. His discharge summary recites 
that he was always attentive and actively participated in his treatment. His counselor 
commented that he needed to continue working on relapse prevention. His prognosis 
for recovery at discharge was “guarded” (AX C). He stopped drinking at about this time 
(Tr. 100).  
 
Shortly after completing his inpatient treatment, Applicant obtained a prescription 
for a drug to reduce his craving for alcohol. He did not use it regularly because of its bad 
effects on his digestive system, but he keeps it with him in case he feels stressed and is 
unable to contact someone in his support network (Tr. 112-14). 
 
In March 2003, while continuing to work as an aviation mechanic, Applicant 
started a lawn care business to generate some additional income (AX E). In October 
2006, all his equipment was stolen, and he borrowed $5,000 to replace it (AX F; Tr. 60-
61). 
 
In March 2007, Applicant purchased a home. In January 2008, Applicant’s lawn-
service business declined, some of his clients stopped paying him, and he lost one of 
his larger commercial contracts (Tr. 63). He fell behind on his home mortgage payments 
(AX G).  
 
In September or October 2007, Applicant had two relapses, after about a year 
and eight months of sobriety (Tr. 100). The first occurred when he drank several beers 
at home because he was embarrassed by his delinquent mortgage payments and under 
stress by his level of indebtedness and the downturn in his lawn care business (Tr. 102-
07). The second occurred within two or three weeks as a result of the same stressors 
(Tr. 108-11).  
 
Applicant currently attends AA meetings twice a week, and he has a local 
sponsor (Tr. 120).  In addition, his mother, an AA participant for many years, is his “long 
distance sponsor.” They talk at least once a day (Tr. 115). One of Applicant’s co-
sponsors in AA describes him as a “strong influence” in their meetings. He is the first 
person to arrive at meetings, helps with administration, and is the last to leave (AX H). 
Another co-sponsor believes he has become a stronger person because of his past 
problems (AX I).  
 
Applicant and his long-time girlfriend (the same person involved in the May 2001 
incident) were married about three weeks before the hearing. His wife has taken over 
many of the responsibilities of the lawn service business, significantly reducing his 
stress level (Tr. 115). His financial situation is now under control (Tr. 118-19).  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s mother and stepfather consider him a hard worker who has become 
stronger, healthier, happier, and more productive and certain of his path in life (AX J). 
His spouse believes he works hard at maintaining sobriety and takes it very seriously. In 
her written statement and her testimony at the hearing, she described him as 
trustworthy, loyal, and dedicated to his family (AX K; Tr. 133). She testified that, after he 
completed the outpatient treatment in March 2006, they had a “whole new life,” being 
happy and doing things together as a family (Tr. 129). His father-in-law and mother-in-
law have helped and supported his rehabilitation efforts. They regard him as a 
dedicated, strong, trustworthy, and caring person (AX L).  
 
One of Applicant’s supervisors considers him one of the best, most dedicated 
mechanics in the shop (AX M). A coworker for the past six years regards him as 
trustworthy, fair, and helpful (AX N). The lead technician in his shop states that his 
performance has been exemplary and his integrity is unquestioned (AX O). The lead 
technician nominated Applicant as employee of the quarter. Applicant has twice 
received cash bonuses of $200 for his performance (AX O and P). He received a letter 
of appreciation from his division manager for his initiative and hard work in the summer 
of 2006 (AX Q). Applicant’s annual performance appraisals for the past six years all 
rated him in the top category of “distinguished” on a five-level scale. (AX R) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
6 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant consumed alcohol to excess from 1991 to “at least” 
September 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a), was charged with multiple alcohol-related offenses 
between 1990 and June 2005 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-f), received outpatient alcohol-related 
counseling from July 2005 through May 2006 and was diagnosed as suffering from 
alcohol abuse (SOR ¶ 1.g), and received inpatient treatment of alcohol abuse in 
February 2006 and was diagnosed as suffering from alcohol dependence (SOR ¶ 1.h). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21 as follows: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(a). Applicant’s record of alcohol-related 
violence, underage drinking, and DUI arrests raise this disqualifying condition. 
 
 
7 
 
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “habitual or binge consumption of 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c). This disqualifying 
condition is raised by Applicant’s numerous instances of drinking to the point of 
impaired judgment.  
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised either by “diagnosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.” AG ¶ 22(d). Applicant’s diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence by a medical doctor in the inpatient treatment program raises this 
disqualifying condition.  
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “evaluation of alcohol abuse or 
alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program.” AG ¶ 22(e). Applicant’s diagnosis of alcohol 
abuse was by a licensed clinical alcohol and drug abuse counselor. Because there is no 
evidence showing that the licensed clinical alcohol and drug abuse counselor had the 
same qualifications and diagnostic authority as a licensed clinical social worker, this 
disqualifying condition is not raised. 
 
Finally, a disqualifying condition may be raised by “relapse after diagnosis of 
alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.” AG 
¶ 22(f). Applicant’s two relapses in September and October 2007 raise this condition. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(a), (c), (d), and (f), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). The first prong of this 
mitigating condition focuses on the recentness of the conduct. There are no Abright line@ 
rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a 
careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 
(App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant stopped drinking after completing his inpatient treatment in early 2006. 
He voluntarily sought treatment beyond the requirements of his probation and gained 
valuable insights into his behavior. He abstained from drinking until his two relapses in 
 
8 
 
 
September and October 2007, a period of about 20 months. He abstained from the date 
of his last relapse in October 2007 until the date of the hearing, about a year later. He 
has diligently participated in AA, and he has strong support from his spouse, mother, 
and in-laws. He has continued his outstanding performance at work. There have been 
no alcohol-related incidents since his arrest in June 2005. According to his spouse, 
there has been a dramatic change in his attitude, stress level, family involvement, and 
level of happiness. He was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. I conclude the 
first prong of AG ¶ 23(a) is established.  
 
 The second prong (“so infrequent”) and third prong (“unusual circumstances 
unlike to recur”) of AG ¶ 23(a) are not established; however, the final prong (“does not 
cast doubt”) is established. Applicant has aggressively addressed his alcohol 
dependence, gained insight into his behavior, surrounded himself with a support 
network, and conducted himself in a lawful and responsible manner. His focus has 
shifted from irresponsible drinking to focusing on his job and his family. He has 
demonstrated his determination to maintain his sobriety. I conclude the mitigating 
condition in AG ¶ 23(a) is established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). Applicant 
acknowledged his alcohol problems, sought treatment, established a support network, 
abstained from alcohol for 20 months before a relapse, and abstained from alcohol for a 
year after his relapse. I conclude AG ¶ 23(b) is established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.” AG ¶ 23(d). Applicant has met all the elements of this mitigating condition 
except the favorable prognosis. His prognosis from the inpatient program was 
“guarded.” His prognosis from the outpatient program was “good,” but that prognosis 
was from a licensed clinical alcohol and drug abuse counsel, not a “medical 
professional” as defined in AG¶ 22(d) or a licensed clinical social worker.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was charged with assault in 1989 (SOR ¶ 2.a), 
inflicting corporal injury on a cohabitant in 2001 (SOR ¶ 2.b), assault in 2003 (SOR ¶ 
2.c), and the alcohol-related offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-f (SOR ¶ 2.d). The concern 
raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
 
9 
 
 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30.  
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include 
“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and (c), shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). As discussed 
above under Guideline G, a substantial time has passed since Applicant’s criminal 
behavior, and he has abstained from alcohol for a substantial period. I conclude this 
mitigating condition is established. 
 
 Security concerns arising from criminal conduct also may be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). For the reasons set out above in the discussion of Guideline G, I conclude this 
mitigating condition is established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and J in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
 
10 
 
 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
 Applicant was well-prepared for the hearing. He presented himself as contrite for 
his past, candid, intelligent, credible, and committed to a responsible lifestyle. In spite of 
his alcohol-related problems, he has held a security clearance for more than ten years, 
apparently without incident. Most of his criminal conduct was alcohol-related, and he 
appears to have his alcohol problem under control.  
 
 Applicant is now a mature adult, married, the father of a child, a homeowner, and 
a talented and dedicated aviation mechanic. He has grown out of his youthful behavior, 
dealt with the demons from his childhood, received counseling, established a support 
network, and focused himself on his family and his job. He has candidly disclosed his 
past, eliminating the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. He has 
taken significant steps to minimize the likelihood of recurrence. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines G and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-h:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
