1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-00228
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
December 10, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on July 12, 2007.  On June 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines H and E for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 12, 2008.  He answered the
SOR in writing on July 18, 2008, and subsequently requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request soon thereafter, and I received the
case assignment on August 25, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on that same
day, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 11, 2008.  The
2
Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 and 2, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit A, without objection.  DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on September 19, 2008.  I granted
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until September 25, 2008, to submit
additional matters.  On September 23, 2007, he submitted Exhibit B, without objection.
The record closed on that same day.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.c. of the SOR, and Subparagraph 2.a., of the SOR, as it relates
to Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.c., without any explanations.
The Applicant is 22 years of age, and a recent, June 2008, college graduate (TR
at page 18 line 23 to page 21 line 11).  He was very active in college, and a member of
a college fraternity (Id).  He has recently started “an in home personal training service;”
and as such, is very concerned about his health (TR at page 18 line 23 to page 21 line
11).
Guideline H - Drug Involvement & Guideline E - Personal Conduct
1.a.~1.c., and 2.a.  The Applicant has smoked marijuana, at most, about 50
times (TR at page 27 line 7 to page 28 line 19).  While attending college, from
September of 2004 until September of 2007, the Applicant smoked marijuana at his
college fraternity between 10~20 times (Id, and GX 1 at page 10, and AppX A at page
1).  He last used the drug in that setting in September of 2007, when “a couple of guys
were watching TV and . . . [he] was sitting there and somebody passed it around and . .
. [he] took a puff or two . . .” (TR at page 44 line 18 to page 45 line 5).
The Applicant also contributed to the purchase of marijuana 5~10 times, the last
time being concurrent with his penultimate usage, sometime in 2006 (TR at page 43 line
18 to page 44 line 12).  Again, in a fraternity setting, he “would throw $5 on the table for
whoever got it. . . . [He] never purchased it from a drug dealer . . .” (TR at page 34 line
23 to page 35 line 22).
The Applicant executed his e-QIP in July of 2007 (GX 1).  He thus used
marijuana once after executing this questionnaire, but prior to obtaining a security
clearance (TR at page 40 lines 1~23, and at page 44 line 18 to page 45 line 5).  At his
hearing, he averred that he intended no future drug involvement (TR at page 35 lines
20~25).  Subsequent to his hearing, Applicant signed a statement of intent, vowing to
“[d]isassociate from drug using affiliates,” and “to never buy, use, sell or manufacture
any drugs in the future” (AppX B).  He further acknowledged that, by signing this
statement, any future drug involvement would result in any clearance he may hold being
“revoked” (Id).
3
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
4
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
Paragraph 24:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline also notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.
Under Subparagraph 25(a), “any drug abuse” may be disqualifying.  As is the
“purchase” of illegal drugs under Subparagraph 25(c).  Here the Applicant used
marijuana about 50 times, with his last usage being about a year prior to his hearing.
This is countered, however, by the mitigating condition found in Subparagraph 26(a).
The Applicant’s Drug Involvement “happened under such circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  Here, the Applicant has graduated from college,
and has left the attitude of complacency about marijuana of his college fraternity.
Subparagraph 26(b) is also applicable, as Applicant has shown “a demonstrated intent
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment . . . .  This includes but is not limited to
consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.”  Here, the Applicant used
an illegal substance, marijuana, about 50 times, and used it once after executing his e-
QIP.  However, this is countered by Subparagraph 17(c) as “it happened under such
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  Again, the Applicant
has graduated from college, and has left the attitude of complacency about marijuana of
5
his college fraternity.  Furthermore, the Applicant has formally and credibly eschewed
any future drug involvement.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns
arising from his Drug Involvement and related Personal Conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
