
 
2 
 
provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered seven documentary 
exhibits. (Items 1-7.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on August 13, 
2016. Applicant submitted additional documents that have been identified and entered 
into evidence without objection as Items A through G. The case was assigned to this 
Administrative Judge on June 5, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 53 years old, and he is married. He is employed as a flight line 
mechanic by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in 
connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Item 2.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists 10 allegations (1.a. through 1.j.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The delinquent debts total 
more than $30,000. All of the SOR allegations were established by Items 3, 4, and 5, 
and they will be discussed below in the order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $1,701. Applicant admitted in his RSOR that this debt has been on his credit 
report for many years, but he contends that he could not find enough information to 
settle it. He added that he disputed it with the credit reporting agencies in 2014, and he 
believed it to be removed. (Item 1.) In Post-FORM Item A, Applicant reaffirmed that he 
has disputed this debt, and it has been removed from his current credit report. (Item B.)   
 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $356. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that he settled 
this debt on June 16, 2015. (Item 1.) RSOR attachments show that this debt was 
settled.  
   
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $99. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that he settled 
this debt on June 16, 2015. (Item 1.) RSOR attachments show that this debt was 
settled. 
   
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $81. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that he settled 
this debt on June 16, 2015. (Item 1.) RSOR attachments show that this debt was 
settled.  
          
 
3 
 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $728. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that he settled this debt 
in 2011, as reflected in his credit report. (Item 1.) RSOR attachments show that this 
debt was settled.  
 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgment filed against Applicant in 
December 2006 in the amount of $1,058.  Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, 
and he wrote that he settled this debt in 2006. (Item 1.)  RSOR attachments show that 
this debt was settled.  
 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $16,057. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that he paid $4,000 
toward this debt. He planned to borrow from his 401k to pay the rest of the amount due.  
While Department Counsel raised the issue that borrowing from a 401k raised tax 
issues, Applicant correctly stated that if the amount is borrowed rather than disbursed, 
no tax issues are raised. (Item 1.) Post-FORM Exhibits A, B, and C establish that this 
debt has been settled. 
 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $811. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that this debt has been 
disputed for years because of service and equipment that he did not receive. (Item 1.) 
Post-FORM Exhibit F establishes that this debt has been settled. 
  
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $108. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that this debt should 
have been settled by his employer’s disability insurance company in 2010; Applicant 
settled this debt on June 17, 2015. (Item 1.) Based on the other evidence introduced in 
this case, I find that this debt has been resolved. 
 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $10,000. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, but wrote it was the same debt as 
that listed on 1.g., above. (Item 1.) Post-FORM Exhibits A, B, and C establish that this 
debt is the same as 1.g., above, and it has been settled.  
 
Applicant explained that his delinquent debts began in 2009 after he had 
experienced an extremely serious illness and period of rehabilitation for 14 months. 
During this period he only received 70% of his regular income, and he also had endured 
a 3 month labor dispute, when he only collected $75 as month from his union. Also, 
while he was out of work, his father-in-law became ill with cancer, and he and his wife 
helped to pay some of those bills. (Item 7.) Applicant also indicated that during his 
divorce from his first wife, some of these SOR debts had been ordered by the court to 
be paid by his ex-wife. (Item A.)  
   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Applicant had many delinquent debts for several years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) as potentially applicable in this 
case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
 
6 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant explained that his debts occurred for several reasons, including: his 
illness and subsequent loss of earnings, his underemployment during the work 
stoppage, the unexpected bills from his father-in-law’s cancer and his divorce. Applicant 
has been working responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts and it appears that all of 
 
7 
 
his debts have now been resolved or reduced. Therefore, mitigating factors AG ¶ 20 (b) 
and (d) have been established and I find for Applicant under Guideline F. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns under 
the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
 
