KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s explanation about his period of underemployment as well as his
explanations about other matters that he is providing for the first time in his appeal constitute
new evidence that the Appeal Board is prohibited from considering. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05996.a1
DATE: 11/3/2017
DATE: November 3, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05996
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 19, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On August 16, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello, denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant retired from the military in 2008, worked for different Federal contractors from
2008 to 2014, and was unemployed from November 2014 to September 2015 before he began
working for his present employer.  He claimed that a charged-off second mortgage was current, but
provided no documentary evidence to corroborate a repayment plan or payments.  He also claimed
he paid another debt and planned to resolve other debts, but provided no documentary proof.  He
did not provide information about his current finances.  There is insufficient evidence to conclude
that it is unlikely similar problems will recur.  Even though his lengthy period of unemployment was
a condition beyond his control, the Judge could not conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the
circumstances due to the lack of evidence corroborating his assertions.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in her findings of fact because she failed to mention 
his underemployment from October 2015 to February 2016.  We conclude the Judge did not err in
this regard.  Applicant’s security clearance application dated December 2015 reflects that he
occupied a full-time employment position “From (Month/Year): 09/2015 To (Month/Year):
Present” and the record contains no evidence that he was underemployed during the period in
question.  Applicant’s explanation about his period of underemployment as well as his explanations
about other matters that he is providing for the first time in his appeal constitute new evidence that
the Appeal Board is prohibited from considering.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant also contends that he was not afforded enough time to obtain information to
respond to Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM).  On October 7, 2016,
Applicant received a copy of the FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit any
objections or additional information that he wished considered.  Applicant neither submitted a
response to the FORM nor requested additional time for submitting a response.  In his appeal brief,
Applicant did not identify any particular document that he could not obtain during the 30-day period
for submitting a response.  From our review of the record, we conclude that Applicant has failed to
establish a prima facie case that he was denied due process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02933 at
2 (App. Bd. Sep. 23, 2016).   
Applicant further argues the Judge erred in finding that he told an investigator in 2012 that
he was financially stable and was working with a lawyer to rectify his finances.  He claims he told
the investigator that he was working with the lawyer regarding an issue with a mortgage company
and he was contacting creditors on his own to work out payment arrangement.  We note the Judge’s
finding in question is taken almost verbatim from the results of Applicant’s interview with an
investigator.  Applicant was provided a copy of the results of that interview with the FORM and was
given an opportunity to submit objections or comments regarding it, but he did not do so.  We
conclude the Judge’s challenged finding is supported by such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make
a favorable trustworthiness decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a
whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa. 
A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a
different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01652 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 7, 2017).  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
