 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-06923 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate alleged foreign influence 
security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to and contact with relatives 
residing in Lebanon, Kuwait and Israel raised a security concern under the foreign 
influence guideline. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
 The hearing was held on May 23, 2017. By agreement of the parties, Applicant 
and his spouse had a joint hearing because their cases raised similar security concerns. 
Applicant, his spouse, and a number of colleagues and friends testified at the hearing. 
The exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the record without objection.1  
 
 On July 12, 2017, Applicant’s counsel requested that the record be re-opened to 
allow him to submit the decision of another government agency (AGA) reversing its prior 
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 – 3; Applicant’s Exhibits A – P. Correspondence, the notice of hearing, the case 
management order were marked Appellate Exhibits I – III. 
 
2 
 
decision denying Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. The AGA’s prior 
adverse decision was based on similar security concerns in this case and evidence about 
it was already part of the record. Without objection, the record was re-opened and the 
AGA decision statement was admitted into the record.2  
 
 On July 13, 2017, I notified both sides that the case appeared appropriate for 
summary disposition in Applicant’s favor. See generally ISCR Case No. 15-03176, n.2 
(App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (benchmark that administrative judges can use in deciding 
whether summary disposition is warranted in a given case). I did so after considering the 
entire record evidence, including the newly submitted evidence and the parties’ respective 
positions.3 Department Counsel objected to resolution of the case via summary decision.4 
Neither party submitted additional evidence, and the record closed on July 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant was born in Lebanon. He attended American preparatory schools and 
university in Lebanon. He came to the United States in 1999 to attend a conference and 
met his now former wife. They married in 2000 and divorced in 2007. He applied for and 
was granted permanent U.S. residency status, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2005. The following year, Applicant renounced his Lebanese citizenship. He only holds a 
U.S. passport. He has been employed by a large federal contractor since 2010, and has 
held positions with other federal contractors since 2002. He was granted a security 
clearance in approximately 2010. 
 
In 2007, Applicant met his current spouse while they were attending the same U.S. 
graduate school. She was born in Israel. She came to the United States in 2002 on 
academic scholarship to attend an internationally well-respected U.S. college. She was 
19 years old at the time and only her late father supported her decision to leave the family 
home, attend college, and pursue a professional career.  
 
Applicant and his wife married in 2009. They had a small wedding, inviting only a 
few close friends. They did not invite their parents, siblings, or other relatives to the 
wedding. Applicant’s wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. That same year, 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application. He answered questions about his 
background, including reporting his foreign connections, relatives, and travel. He had 
reported this information on past security clearance applications.  
                                                          
2 The AGA’s decision statement, dated June 22, 2017, was marked Exhibit Q. It is unclear from the record 
whether this other favorable adjudication was based on a current investigation that meets or exceeds that 
necessary for the security clearance at issue. ISCR Case No. 12-04540 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2014); ISCR 
Case No. 03-04172 (App. Bd. Jun. 7, 2005). Arguably, Applicant waived (or, at a minimum, forfeited) the 
issue of reciprocity because he did not raise it before the record closed. See ISCR Case No. 16-00681 at 
2 (A.J. Leonard Oct. 4, 2017) (concisely explaining waiver and forfeiture). However, in light of the resolution 
of this case and limited evidentiary record, I have not made a specific ruling on this issue. 
 
3 Transcript (Tr.) at 111 (After noting that Applicant “seems to have integrated himself very fully in the 
American culture,” Department Counsel stated that the Government left resolution of the case to my 
discretion).  
 
4 Appellate Exhibit IV. No reason was provided for the Government’s shift in position. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s parents are Lebanese citizens and reside in Lebanon. Applicant’s 
father is a retired physician, who before retiring ran his own small private medical practice. 
His mother attended and graduated from an American university in Lebanon with financial 
assistance from a USG agency. However, she never worked outside the home. Applicant 
tries to speak with his parents at least every other month. He last traveled to Lebanon 
over seven years ago. His parents fully support his decision to live in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s older brother holds dual citizenship with Lebanon and the United 
Kingdom. He lives and works in Kuwait. He works in the financial services industry. 
Applicant speaks with his older brother on a somewhat infrequent basis. 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Israel. His father-in-law 
passed away over a year ago. Applicant and his spouse are not particularly close to their 
parents, siblings, and other foreign relatives. Applicant has not met his mother-in-law in 
person. He met his father-in-law briefly via the internet before he proposed to his wife.  
 
Applicant’s wife is not close to her mother. They have not been on speaking terms 
for some time. They last spoke in March 2016, shortly after Applicant’s father died. 
Applicant last traveled to Israel in 2014. She did not attend her father’s funeral in 2016 
because, in part, her family did not inform her of his passing for several days. She also 
did not attend her father’s funeral because she did not want to see her siblings. She has 
four siblings, who are all quite older than her. She is unaware of their exact ages and has 
not been on speaking terms with most of them since deciding to leave Israel to pursue 
her educational and professional goals. Her decision to marry Applicant, a member of a 
minority group, was looked upon unfavorably by her mother and siblings.  
 
None of Applicant’s foreign relatives know about his work. They are not aware that 
Applicant and his wife are being sponsored for security clearances. None of Applicant’s 
relatives work for or have any connection to, or association with, a foreign government or 
entity. Applicant and his wife do not currently have any foreign financial interests, 
property, or assets. All their tangible assets and property are in the United States. They 
do not provide financial support to any foreign persons, and are not financially indebted 
or beholden to any foreign government, person, entity, or group.5  
 
 Applicant has worked on open-source intelligence matters in support of contracts 
held by his employer with a U.S. Government (USG) agency. A colleague testified that 
Applicant “was bringing a lot of creative ideas that the client was loving and had a direct 
impact on the mission.”6 He went on to state that Applicant’s current work has been one 
of their employer’s “most successful engagements,” and some of Applicant’s 
assessments have been reviewed at the highest levels of the USG.7  
                                                          
5 Tr. 26, 45-46, 51-80, 82-110; Exhibit 1; Exhibit A; Answer, Attachments 1 – 5. Applicant’s wife received a 
25% interest in the family home as an inheritance from her father’s estate. She is only entitled to receive 
this inheritance upon her mother’s death. She is in the process of disposing of the inheritance, because 
she does not want “anything to do with the family house” or her family in Israel. (Tr. 67.) 
 
6 Tr. 23. 
 
7 Tr. 24, 28; Exhibits N, P; Answer, Attachment 8. 
 
4 
 
Applicant is highly regarded by his peers, supervisors, and government clients for 
his work ethic, skills and abilities, high ethical standards, and loyalty to the United States.8 
He has handled sensitive USG and company information for years without issue. Because 
of Applicant’s stellar reputation for handling and safeguarding sensitive matters, he was 
recently selected by his employer to oversee a complex internal corporate matter.9 
 
At the request of a USG agency client, Applicant submitted a security clearance 
application in approximately 2012 to upgrade his clearance. Before submitting the 
application, Applicant informed the client that he and his wife were foreign born and their 
families lived abroad. The client, however, insisted that Applicant proceed.  
 
In November 2013, Applicant’s request for access to classified information was 
denied by the USG agency. He immediately appealed the adverse decision. Nearly four 
years later, in June 2017, a senior adjudication official from the USG agency informed 
Applicant’s counsel in a concise two paragraph, one-page letter that the agency was 
reversing its previous decision. The official went on to state that Applicant would not be 
required to list on future applications the denial, because it had been reversed.10 Applicant 
disclosed the adverse security clearance determination by the agency in response to 
relevant questions on his recent clearance application.11 
 
 Applicant has continued to perform his job at an exceptionally high level. He is now 
responsible for managing and mentoring other employees, and has been placed in charge 
of handling multimillion-dollar contracts.12 A recent performance review reflects that 
Applicant delivered “on time and under budget and greatly exceeded client 
expectations.”13 He has earned numerous awards for his leadership, excellent work, and 
dedication.14 He has received high praise from his USG client. Recently, the USG client 
stated that Applicant “sets the standard for analytic expertise and dedication, and has 
been a go-to intelligence analyst for short-fuse, complicated projects.”15  
  
                                                          
8 Tr. 27 (everyone who has ever worked with Applicant has “come out singing his praises”); Exhibit B; 
Exhibits D – P; Answer, Attachments 7 - 14. 
 
9 Tr. 29-30.  
 
10 Tr. 83; Exhibit Q. 
 
11 Exhibit 1.  
 
12 Exhibits A – B.  
 
13 Exhibit B.  
 
14 Exhibit C at 21; Answer, Attachments 13, 16.  
 
15 Exhibit C at 21.  
 
5 
 
 At hearing, Applicant credibly explained his motivation and dedication to his job as 
follows: 
 
It's like this is what the U.S. is about; it's about the soft power we project 
towards the rest of the world, and the rest of the world could send us the 
best people back. They did it to my mom. I've been serving in national 
security and protecting my country here in the U.S. almost all my career, 
and this is the great part about being in this country and why day in and day 
out I'm the first person in the office and the last person to leave. I turn on 
the lights and off the lights, I work 14-hour days and people say, ‘[ ], you're 
killing yourself.’ But this is a labor of love, this is why I'm here. There is no 
way I can thank this great nation for what they've done for me and my 
family than to be able to do this.16 
 
 One of Applicant’s closest friends has worked for the USG in the national security 
field for several years and has had multiple deployments to Iraq. He was one of the few 
people invited to Applicant’s wedding and testified as follows about Applicant and his wife: 
 
First off, I would just like to point out that in my opinion and in my experience, 
these individuals [Applicant and his spouse] are as American as you and I, 
as anyone else in this room. They are loyal, dutiful, trustworthy, accountable 
. . . I think the best compliment that I could give them in evidence in the way 
I feel about them -- I explained to you that I spent quite a bit of time in Iraq 
-- I would trust them with my life there, without question.17 
 
A retired U.S. military lieutenant general, who is a vice president for the company 
that employs Applicant, submitted a letter attesting to Applicant’s reliability. general goes 
on to state that Applicant “handles sensitive matters very professionally, displaying a 
maturity that place him ahead of his peers. Often, he is personally selected to lead new 
efforts and tasks to ensure that they are done correctly and all appropriate policies and 
restrictions are followed.”18 
 
Administrative Notice – Lebanon and Israel.19 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary republic. Lebanon's history since 1943 has been 
marked by periods of political turmoil interspersed with prosperity. The United States 
seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon, and to help preserve its 
independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. The United States, 
                                                          
16 Tr. 99-100.  
 
17 Tr. 47-48.  
 
18 Exhibit K.  
 
19 See generally Exhibits 2 and 3, as updated by current documents posted on U.S. State Department 
website (state.gov) and are appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit V. Although the SOR alleges that 
Applicant’s brother’s residence in Kuwait raised a foreign influence security concern, neither party 
presented evidence or matters for administrative notice regarding this country.  
 
6 
 
along with the international community, supports full implementation of several UN 
Security Council Resolutions, including the disarming of all militias in Lebanon.  
 
The U.S. State Department’s current human rights report on Lebanon reflects that 
civilian authorities generally maintained control over the armed forces and other security 
forces, although Palestinian security and militia forces, the designated terrorist group 
Hizballah, and other extremist elements operated outside the direction or control of 
government officials. It also reflects that the most significant human rights abuses during 
the year were torture and abuse committed by security forces. The report goes on to state 
that although the legal structure provides for prosecution and punishment, government 
officials enjoyed a measure of impunity for human rights abuses. 
 
Furthermore, the State Department’s human rights report notes that despite the 
presence of Lebanese and UN security forces, Hizballah retained significant influence 
over parts of the country, and the government made no tangible progress toward 
disbanding and disarming armed militia groups. Palestinian refugee camps continued to 
act as self-governed entities and maintained security and militia forces not under the 
direction of government officials. 
 
The current State Department travel warning for Lebanon notes that violent 
extremist groups, including Hizballah, operate in Lebanon. The warning also notes that 
there is the potential for death or injury in Lebanon because of terrorist bombings and 
attacks. Furthermore, the Lebanese government cannot guarantee the protection of U.S. 
citizens against sudden outbreaks of violence, which can occur at any time in Lebanon. 
Additionally, the U.S. Embassy does not offer protection services to U.S. citizens who feel 
unsafe in Lebanon. Because of these dangerous conditions, the State Department warns 
U.S. citizens to avoid all travel to Lebanon. 
 
Israel is a multiparty parliamentary democracy. Israel and the United States have 
historically strong bilateral relations, including cooperation on defense issues. However, 
there have been at least three cases in which U.S. government employees were 
convicted of disclosing classified information to Israel or of conspiring to act as an Israeli 
agent. The most prominent of these cases involved Jonathan Pollard, a former U.S. 
defense analyst, who was convicted of selling classified information to Israel in 1986. 
Following his conviction, the Israeli government granted Pollard citizenship and confirmed 
he was an Israeli agent. U.S. officials remain concerned about possible industrial 
espionage from Israel.  
 
The current State Department travel warning for Israel states that the security 
situation remains complex in Israel and the West Bank and can change quickly. U.S. 
citizens are warned to remain vigilant throughout Israel, as the most significant human 
rights problem impacting the country were terrorist attacks targeting civilians. The travel 
warning states that U.S. citizens should avoid all travel to the Gaza Strip, which remains 
under control of Hamas, a designated foreign terrorist organization.  
 
  
 
7 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards).  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.20 
                                                          
20 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
8 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. (AG ¶ 6.) 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.21  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact . . .  with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
                                                          
21 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”22 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.23 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country where 
elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate somewhat freely, such an 
applicant faces a very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their 
connections to and contacts with foreign relatives.24 
 
 Here, the overwhelming weight of the record evidence favors granting Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance. On the one hand, Applicant’s ties to Lebanon and Israel 
through his and his wife’s family members residing in these countries raise, on their face, 
a heightened security concern. On the other hand, though, Applicant and his wife’s 
familial ties to these relatives is not as strong as the ties that each of them separately and 
collectively have formed to the United States.  
                                                          
22 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
23 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
10 
 
Of note, Applicant immigrated to the U.S. nearly 20 years ago. He has established 
a life in the United States. He earned advanced academic degrees in the U.S. and then 
started a professional career – choosing to work for the United States and its security. He 
married, divorced, and married again. His second marriage is to a person that his family, 
at first, disapproved of due to their prejudices. His wife’s relatives still do not fully accept 
their marriage. He has been employed as a federal contractor for over 15 years and has 
a favorable track record of handling and safeguarding sensitive information.  
 
Applicant’s wife’s relationship to her family in Israel has been strained since she 
left Israel at age 19 to advance her education and pursue a professional career in the 
West. These weak familial ties diminished further after her father’s death in 2016. Her 
relationship to her relatives in Israel and, thus, by extension, Applicant’s connections to 
his in-laws, no longer pose a security concern.  
 
In short, the evidence clearly reflects that Applicant and his wife’s professional, 
social, and economic ties and loyalty squarely lie with the United States. Accordingly, 
Applicant can reasonably be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest raised 
by his and his wife’s foreign familial connections in favor of U.S. national security interests.  
 
Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In a Guideline B case 
this assessment necessarily requires a judge to consider the relevant country or countries 
at issue. Furthermore, a past favorable clearance adjudication does not bar security 
officials from reassessing an applicant’s eligibility, especially when new matters arise.  
 
After considering and weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I 
find that Applicant mitigated any security concerns raised by his foreign familial 
connections. All of the above listed mitigating conditions apply, in full or in part, and 
together with the favorable whole-person factors raised by the evidence,25 mitigate the 
foreign influence security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:          For Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
25 See AG ¶ 2 (whole-person concept). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (relevant factors to consider in determining 
whether granting a person a clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of the United States). 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
