 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08847 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
James Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 30, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision on Remand 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2014, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 8, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 29, 2016. The hearing 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision on remand would be the same if the case 
was considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 7, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record 
was left open until October 31, 2016, for receipt of additional documentation. 
Unbeknownst to the undersigned, Applicant sent a request for an extension of time to 
submit additional documentation to the DoD Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF). 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on October 11, 2016. 
 
On June 6, 2017, I issued a Decision denying Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Applicant appealed that Decision. On September 8, 2017, the Appeal Board 
remanded that Decision with instructions that I “consider the documents Applicant has 
attached to his brief and issue a new Decision in accordance with the Directive.” On 
September 25, 2017, I issued an Order on Remand, reopening the record, and giving 
Applicant “until close of business, Wednesday, October 25, 2017, to submit through 
Department Counsel ‘the documents Applicant has attached to his brief.’” On or before 
October 25, 2017, Applicant submitted said documents, which are mark as Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AppX) A, and admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
for seven years. He is divorced but remarried, and has two children.  (TR at page 18 
line 1 to page 20 line 2, and GX 1 at page 12.)  Applicant attributes his past-due 
indebtedness and income tax delinquencies to his current wife, a nurse, losing her 
income as a care giver to her mother, when Applicant’s mother-in-law passed away.  
(TR at page 28 lines 13~21.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 14 debts totaling approximately $19,693, and a state income tax debt for 
about $3,357. It also alleged that he failed to file his Federal and state income tax 
returns, as required, for tax years 2012 and 2014. Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations. 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. and 1.b.  Applicant avers that he has now filed his Federal and state income 
tax returns for tax year 2012.  (TR at page 20 line 5 to page 23 line 16.)  He also avers 
that he intends to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2014.  (Id.)  
Applicant has submitted no documentation in support of his averments. These 
allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
 1.c. Applicant avers that he is paying his state income tax delinquency by way of 
involuntary garnishment.  (TR at page 20 line 5 to page 23 line 16.) He has submitted 
documentation showing that Applicant “has fully paid” this garnishment. (AppX A at 
page 3.) This allegation is found for Applicant.   
 
3 
 
 
 1.d. and 1.e.  Applicant filed for the protection of a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in June 
of 2002.  It was dismissed in March of 2003.  (TR at page 23 line 17 to page 24 line 16.) 
Applicant again filed for the protection of a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May of 2006.  It 
was dismissed in February of 2007, when Applicant defaulted on his approved payment 
plan.  (TR at page 24 line 17 to page 26 line 1.) 
 
 Throughout his hearing, Applicant averred that he is expecting to receive 
$27,000, as he overpaid his past child support; and an additional $50,000, in a lump 
sum pension payment from a previous employment.  (TR at page 34 line 13 to page 35 
line 24, and at page 38 line 15 to page 40 line 24.)  He further testified that with this 
$77,000, Applicant fully intends to address the remaining alleged past-due 
indebtedness.  (Id.) 
 
 1.f.~1.s.  Applicant admits that he is indebted, as the result of 14 past-due debts, 
in the amount of about $19,693.  (TR at page 26 line 2 to page 37 line 15.)  Despite his 
above mentioned averment to do so; and despite my leaving the record open for him to 
do so, Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard.  These allegations are 
found against Applicant. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15, states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
4 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
5 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt. His actions 
demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt, and an inability to do so. He has 
also failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2014, 
as required. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
While Applicant has satisfied his unpaid state taxes by way of garnishment; he 
still has significant past-due indebtedness, and has yet to file required income tax 
returns. Furthermore, his behavior did not happen long ago, but is continuing. It does 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(d) and 20(g) do not provide mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered the comments of his 
“Maintenance Shop Manager.” (AppX A at page 4.) However, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.~1.s.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
