 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 15-08269 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  
Cathryn E. Young, Esq. 
Griffith, Young & Lass 
 
 
November 29, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant briefly used marijuana over a limited period in 2012 and 2013. Applicant 
has mitigated her false answers on a government questionnaire in 2014 concerning her 
drug use. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, national security 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on July 28, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On October 23, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.1 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 16, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on February 28. 2017. The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on March 1, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 10, 2017. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf, and called two additional witnesses. She also submitted 
Applicant Exhibits A through G, which were received without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 18, 2017. The record was left open until June 
15, 2017, for the receipt of additional evidence. On June 15, 2017, Applicant Exhibit H 
was submitted, and received without objection. The record closed at that time. 
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old software engineering augmentee. She has been married 
to her second husband since June 2014, and has one adult child from her first marriage. 
Applicant has a bachelor’s degree. She is seeking to retain a security clearance in 
connection with her work in the defense industry. She has worked in the defense industry 
for 19 years in positions of increasing responsibility. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she has used illegal drugs. Applicant admitted both of the allegations under this 
paragraph, with explanations.  
 
 1.a. Applicant used marijuana on about two or three occasions between July and 
September 2012, and once in April 2013. All the incidents involved another person 
blowing marijuana smoke into Applicant’s face or mouth. Applicant has had no contact 
with the people she used marijuana with since April 2013. There is no evidence that 
Applicant used marijuana during the period 2009 through 2011. She has not used 
marijuana since April 2013. Her current husband does not use drugs of any kind. 
(Government Exhibit 2 at 9-10; Applicant Exhibit C at 1; Tr. 36, 55-62, 64-70, 84-90.)  
 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.b. Applicant had a security clearance during the time that she was using 
marijuana, as set forth above. (Government Exhibit 1 at Section 25; Tr. 62-63.) 
 
 Applicant was extremely remorseful over her use of marijuana. This conduct is an 
aberration, based on her personal history. Applicant evinces a credible intent not to use 
marijuana in the future, as shown by her testimony and submission of a sworn statement 
of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future, which includes her consent to an immediate 
revocation of her national security eligibility for any violation. Applicant has also taken two 
negative drug tests. (Applicant Exhibits A and B; Tr. 71-73, 78, 92.) 
  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct) 
 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she has engaged in conduct that shows poor judgment, untrustworthiness or 
unreliability. Applicant admitted the single allegation under this paragraph, with 
explanations.  
 
2.a. Applicant filled out an e-QIP on July 28, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) Section 
23 of the questionnaire asked Applicant about her drug use history. First of all, that section 
asked whether Applicant had used controlled substances during the previous seven 
years. Applicant stated, “No.” This was a false answer to a relevant question concerning 
Applicant’s drug use history, since she had used marijuana as described above. The 
same section asks whether Applicant, “EVER illegally used or been otherwise involved 
with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance?” (Emphasis 
in original.) Applicant answered, “No.” This was also a false answer to a relevant question 
about Applicant’s drug use history, since she had a security clearance at the time she 
used marijuana in 2012 and 2013.  
 
Applicant admitted that she answered both questions in the negative, but denied 
that she intentionally falsified her answers. Basically, Applicant did not feel her conduct 
amounted to use as defined by the questionnaire the first time she filled one out. She saw 
it somewhat as being exposed to second-hand smoke, since she did not actively smoke 
marijuana. Applicant further stated that the use just did not occur to her as she filled out 
the questionnaire. (Answer; Government Exhibit 2 at 10; Tr. 73-75, 84, 95.) 
 
In November 2014 Applicant applied for a job with another Federal agency. As part 
of the process Applicant filled out a Questionnaire for National Security Positions, which 
she signed on December 17, 2014. A signed copy of this questionnaire was obtained by 
Applicant from the other Federal agency, and submitted by her counsel. Section 23 of 
that questionnaire asks Applicant whether she had used drugs within the last ten years. 
She answered the question, “Yes,” and proceeded to set forth in detail her brief use of 
marijuana, as described under Paragraph 1, above. She further admitted on the 
questionnaire that having people blow smoke into her face and mouth, “was a way for me 
to justify that I have not used drugs but feel it necessary to state here.” Applicant also 
 
 
4 
 
 
admitted that she had a security clearance at the time she used marijuana. (Applicant 
Exhibit H; Tr. 75-76, 100-105.) 
 
Applicant was subsequently interviewed by an investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) on April 26. 2015. During that interview Applicant set forth 
her drug use in detail. (Government Exhibit 2 at 9-10; Tr. 76-78.) 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant is highly respected by her co-workers, superiors, active duty service 
members, and civilian employees of the military. Five letters of recommendation were 
submitted by Applicant. The writers all had knowledge of the allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant is described as “a trustworthy and reliable individual,” and a “valuable and 
knowledgeable employee.” All the writers recommend that she retain her security 
clearance. (Applicant Exhibit C at 2-6.) 
 
 A co-worker testified on Applicant’s behalf. She has worked with Applicant since 
October 2016, and has knowledge of the allegations in the SOR. The witness believes 
Applicant shows good judgment, except for these isolated incidents, and should be 
granted a security clearance. (Tr. 16-26.) 
 
 Applicant has been a successful employee for many years. She has received 
various recognitions for her performance. Her evaluations indicate that she, “Stretches 
and Often Exceeds Expectations.” This term is defined to mean that Applicant’s, 
“Performance consistently meets and often exceeds the scope of job responsibilities by 
stretching beyond the normally accepted performance.” (Applicant Exhibits D and G.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The security concern relating to Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse is set 
forth in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. §802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted 
in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 I have also examined the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and find that the 
following are controlling in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome the problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
 (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana no more than five times over two brief periods of time in 
2012 and 2013. This conduct was completely out of the normal for Applicant. It has been 
four years since that activity, with no sign of recurrence. She no longer associates with 
the people she used drugs with, and is now married to someone who does not use drugs. 
She has provided a statement of intent and changed her environment. She has fully 
mitigated the Government’s concerns and Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant.  
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct) 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
 
7 
 
 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are applicable under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
was so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s answers to two questions concerning drug use on her e-QIP were false. 
Applicant persuaded herself that having someone else blow smoke in her face did not 
count as use. Upon reflection, Applicant realized that this attempt at justification was 
wrong, and subsequently told the truth. Applicant corrected the falsifications on a 
subsequent questionnaire provided to another Government agency only five months later, 
without being confronted. When interviewed by an investigator from OPM several months 
later, she was completely forthcoming, again without being confronted. These were 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct her omissions. Applicant deeply regrets her conduct, 
which is extremely unlikely to recur. Under the particular circumstances of this case 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns of her conduct. Paragraph 2 is found for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant=s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated her 
short-term marijuana use, and her false answers to the Government concerning that drug 
involvement. Overall, the record evidence does not create substantial doubt as to 
Applicant=s present eligibility for national security eligibility and a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility and access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
