 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08500 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on May 18, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 15, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for June 20, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted 
without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He submitted documents that have been marked AE D through G and 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 28, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. As of the date of the hearing, he had been an 
employee of a defense contractor since 2010. His current status with that employer is 
uncertain. He attended college for a period without earning a degree. He is married with 
two children and a stepchild.1 
 
 The SOR alleges a $3,475 debt to an online university; 19 medical debts totaling 
about $9,000; and 2 miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling $844. All of the debts are 
listed on an August 2015 credit report, an April 2016 credit report, or both credit 
reports.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife is disabled and unable to work. Their children also have medical 
issues. Their family had health insurance, but there were costly co-payments and 
deductibles. She handled the family’s finances. He was unaware that several bills went 
unpaid.3 
 
 The medical debts alleged in the SOR were primarily held by two collection 
companies. One collection company was assigned the five debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.d and 1.o. The total of those five debts is $1,136. Applicant paid those 5 
debts, plus an additional 12 medical debts assigned to that collection company. Those 
12 debts do not appear to be connected to other debts alleged in the SOR, likely 
because they were paid before the SOR was issued.4 
 
 The second collection company was assigned the eight medical debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.k and 1.r through 1.u. The total of those eight debts is $5,679. 
Applicant has been paying that collection company since May 2016. He documented 
payments totaling $383, which paid six debts. The collection company noted in May 
2017 that the total balance due on all their accounts was $7,813. Attributing specific 
debts from the SOR to this creditor is difficult, but Applicant believes the collection 
company is handling all the remaining medical debts that were not assigned to the first 
collection company.5 
 
 The April 2016 credit report lists the $3,475 debt to an online university, plus 
three additional student loans totaling about $14,000. Applicant is current on those three 
loans. He thought the online university loan had been assigned to the Department of 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22, 40-41, 58; GE 1; AE G.  
 
2 GE 3, 4.  
 
3 Tr. at 16-18, 22-23, 29-46, 50; GE 2.  
 
4 Tr. at 17-18, 27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE C.  
 
5 Tr. at 17-20, 28-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE F.  
 
3 
 
Education for collection and was part of the loans that he was paying. He stated that he 
would research the matter and make arrangements to pay the debt if it is not already 
being paid.6 
 
 Applicant denied owing the remaining two miscellaneous delinquent debts. He 
stated that no member of his family ever had service with the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.l and that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q was paid in 2015. Neither debt is listed on the 
April 2016 credit report.7 
 
 Applicant has become more involved in the family’s finances. He stated that his 
finances have improved and stabilized. He maintains a budget. He credibly testified that 
he intends to pay or settle all his debts. He retained an attorney to assist him with his 
finances and credit.8 
 
 Applicant submitted letters attesting to his excellent job performance. He is 
praised for his dedication, leadership, professionalism, work ethic, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.9 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 23-27 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
7 Tr. at 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
8 Tr. at 17-18, 44-59; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE G.  
 
9 AE A, B, E.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, mostly related to medical debts. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s wife is disabled and unable to work. Their children also have medical 
issues. Their family had health insurance, but there were costly co-payments and 
deductibles. The vast majority of the debts in the SOR are medical debts. Applicant paid 
5 medical debts totaling $1,136. He paid an additional 12 medical debts assigned to the 
same collection company. Those 12 debts do not appear to be connected to other debts 
alleged in the SOR, likely because they were paid before the SOR was issued. He has 
payment arrangements with another collection company. He paid $383 to that collection 
company, which resolved 6 debts. In summary, he paid 23 medical debts. He still has 
 
6 
 
more than $7,800 owed to that collection company, but I am convinced that he will 
continue his efforts to pay his debts.  
 
Applicant is current on three student loans. He thought the online university loan 
alleged in the SOR had been assigned to the Department of Education and was part of 
the loans that he was paying. I am satisfied that he will pay it in either event. Applicant 
denied owing the remaining two miscellaneous delinquent debts, and neither debt is 
listed on the April 2016 credit report. 
 
  A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
Applicant established that he has a plan to resolve his financial problems, and he 
took significant action to implement that plan. His financial issues are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. 
 
   
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u:10   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 The SOR alleges two 1.n allegations. They are both found for Applicant. 
