 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03921 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Since January 2015, Applicant has been making 
payments toward the resolution of his largest debt, $19,300 in medical expenses 
incurred by his four children. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on June 22, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on June 28, 2016, and did not respond. The documents appended to the FORM 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, without objection. On October 
25, 2017, I opened the record to allow the parties to provide additional documentation. 
Applicant provided a statement updating the status of his delinquent accounts, which is 
admitted as AE A, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Revised Adjudicated Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
was issued establishing the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG 
implemented in September 2006, and they are effective for any adjudication made on or 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant was hired by a federal contractor in September 2014. Applicant 
completed a security clearance application in September 2014, but did not disclose any 
derogatory information. However, the ensuing investigation revealed and the SOR 
alleges that Applicant owes approximately $21,600 in delinquent accounts. Of this 
amount, $19,300, or 88% are for unpaid medical bills. 
  
 Between September 2001 and September 2014, Applicant worked for a car 
dealership. The medical bills alleged in the SOR were incurred between 2010 and 2013 
for his four children. It is not clear from the record if Applicant and his family were 
covered by insurance when the expenses were incurred. In his January 2015 
background interview, Applicant discussed the medical debt, indicating that the medical 
facility consolidated Applicant’s outstanding balances into one account being collected 
by a law firm. Applicant entered into two payment agreements with the law firm in 
January 2015, one for accounts in his name and the other for the accounts in his wife’s 
name. In his April 2016 answer to the SOR, and again in his October 2017 statement, 
Applicant indicated that he was still participating in the payment plan, paying $100 
monthly for both accounts. Applicant asked the law firm for a letter confirming this 
arrangement and his compliance with the terms of the plan. However, the law firm 
declined to do so.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
clearance will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to meet one’s financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.3 Applicant admits that he owes the delinquent accounts alleged 
in the SOR. His admissions along with the credit reports in the record establish the 
Government’s prima facie case that Applicant has demonstrated “an inability to satisfy 
debts”4 and, given the age of the alleged accounts, “a history of not meeting [his] 
financial obligations.”5 Applicant has presented sufficient evidence that he is making a 
good-faith effort to repay his creditors and that he is involved in an ongoing payment 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
5 AG ¶ 19(c). 
  
 
4 
 
plan.6 Furthermore the majority of the debt is for medical expenses for his children, 
which are expenses beyond Applicant’s control. He has acted responsibly by being 
involved in a payment plan for nearly three years.7 
 
Based on the record, Applicant has mitigated the alleged concerns. In reaching 
this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Typically, 
medical debt is not incurred under circumstances indicating financially irresponsible or 
reckless behavior. Applicant’s accumulation of medical debt for his children does not 
reflect negatively on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.n:      For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors.   
 
7 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control 
. . . , and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
