 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-06919 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.1 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a questionnaire for investigations processing (e-QIP)2 on 
March 10, 2015. On May 23, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F.3 
 
                                                     
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known as 
a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
 
2 Also referred to as a security clearance application (SCA). 
 
3 The DOD CAF acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on August 9, 2016. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 16, 2016. She submitted 
substantial documentation and a narrative response to the FORM, marked as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 6) and AE A 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 68-year-old registered nurse sponsored for a public trust 
determination by a defense contractor since 2002. She was married in 1969 and divorced 
in 1993. She remarried in 2003.  
 
The SOR alleges one charged-off credit card debt totaling $24,355. Applicant 
admitted the debt existed, but claimed in her answer to the SOR that she was no longer 
indebted to the company. She provided several documents in support of her answer.   
 
Applicant and her husband have suffered from several period of disability due to 
medical conditions over the past several years, and they each lost significant income as 
a result. They accumulated credit card debts that they were unable to pay. In 2011, they 
sought the assistance of a credit-repayment company, who assisted them with 
negotiating and paying overdue debts. She made regular monthly payments toward her 
debts through the company. The SOR debt was resolved from partial payments and 
eventually a negotiated charge-off of the debt. The creditor agreed to refrain from 
collection efforts and issued Applicant an IRS Form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt). 
Because of the SOR, Applicant made a further inquiry in 2016 on the status of the debt 
and determined that the creditor agreed to remove the debt notation from her credit report. 
 
Applicant noted that her current financial status was good, and that she and her 
spouse were able to meet their financial obligations. Her submissions to the FORM 
included annotated financial and employment records, and positively reflect Applicant’s 
understanding and organization of her finances. She has been a productive employee 
and her work evaluations reflect her value to the company, and her most recent credit 
report does not reflect any additional delinquencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017.4 The revised AG 
apply to this case. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
4 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The documentary evidence supporting the SOR allegations are sufficient to 
establish the disqualifying conditions. 
 
The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 20 is potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
5 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant resolved her sole delinquent debt in 2013 and ensured that it was 
removed from her credit report once she became aware that it was still being reflected 
there. The debt is aged and no longer a financial burden on the Applicant. She received 
assistance with her financial condition from a professional, and offered documentary 
evidence of such assistance. Her most recent credit report does not reflect any additional 
delinquencies. 
 
  Applicant’s financial condition that led to the SOR debts was largely outside of her 
control. She took appropriate action to contact creditors to resolve all debts, and the SOR 
debt was satisfactorily resolved and removed from her CBR. Applicant appears to be on 
a sound financial footing and can meet all of her current financial needs. Sufficient time 
has passed to suggest that further financial delinquencies are unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 20 
(a), (b), (c), and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s resolved 
SOR debt and showing of current financial responsibility leaves me without doubts about 
her overall financial condition and ability or willingness to face her financial 
responsibilities. Her financial condition no longer casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
  Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant her eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Eligibility for a public 
trust position is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
