 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-08729 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Applicant attributes his current financial problems to the high 
cost he incurred in litigating a child custody dispute after he was accused of 
inappropriately touching his minor daughter. He has repeatedly promised to address and 
resolve his past-due debts, but presented no documentation showing he has taken 
corrective action. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Specifically, the SOR alleges nine charged off or collection accounts. Applicant answered 
the SOR on August 4, 2016, admitting six of the SOR debts (1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 
1.i). Combined, these six delinquent debts total about $50,000.  
 
Applicant claimed in his Answer to be in the process of contacting a credit 
counseling firm to help him address his financial situation. He submitted no 
documentation showing he had received financial counseling or that he had addressed 
any of his SOR debts, including a relatively minor $150 collection account referenced in 
SOR 1.e. He had previously reported this debt on his May 2015 security clearance 
application and claimed then to be in the process of resolving the debt.  
 
 
2 
 On September 26, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant ten exhibits (Items 1 – 10) that the Government offers for 
admission into the record. Applicant received the FORM and accompanying exhibits on 
September 30, 2016. (Appellate Exhibit I.) He was given 30 days to submit a response to 
the FORM and raise an objection(s) to the evidence offered by the Government. He did 
not submit a response, raise an objection, or present any evidence showing that he had 
taken any action to address the past-due debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 On November 2, 2017, I was assigned the case for decision. No additional matters 
were submitted by either party for my consideration. Without objection, Items 1 – 10 are 
admitted into the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 43, is employed by a defense contractor. His security clearance 
application reflects that he was hired by his current employer in September 2012. He has 
been gainfully employed as a federal contractor since at least 2004. He was unemployed 
for a month in 2012, after being fired by a former employer for poor job performance. 
Current co-workers, including a U.S. Navy captain, submitted letters noting Applicant’s 
favorable work performance and expressing their belief that he is a valued team member. 
Each of these persons recommend that Applicant be allowed to retain a security 
clearance, which he initially received in about 2006.  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to divorce, protracted and expensive 
child custody litigation, and a substantial increase in his court-ordered child support 
payments. In 2011, after Applicant and his wife separated, his former marital home was 
foreclosed. Applicant and his wife divorced in August 2012.  
 
Applicant and his ex-wife shared custody of their now eight-year-old daughter until 
March 2014, when his wife filed a petition to modify the court’s child custody order. 
Applicant’s ex-wife requested sole custody because Applicant had allegedly 
inappropriately touched his daughter’s private parts. A protective order was issued and 
Applicant was required to receive a psychosexual evaluation. He claims that the evaluator 
“inserted things into [the] report that [he] did not say” and “gave an inaccurate accounting 
of what [they] discussed” during the evaluation.1  
 
Applicant reports going through other psychological evaluations during the course 
of the custody litigation. From November 2014 to December 2014,Applicant received 
inpatient treatment. This inpatient treatment occurred after Applicant sought mental health 
counseling required by a magistrate to facilitate reunification efforts. In February 2015, 
Applicant’s ex-wife was awarded sole custody by the court. The court also increased the 
monthly child support amount Applicant is required to pay from $538 to $1,368.  
                                                          
1 Item 10 at 5. This psychological evaluation report was not provided by either party. Also, no investigative 
reports, court records, medical records, or other relevant documents related to the serious allegations of 
child sexual abuse were submitted. The information regarding this serious allegation are taken from 
Applicant’s security clearance application (Item 5) and the summary of the security clearance interview that 
was prepared by the security clearance investigator (Item 10). 
 
3 
Applicant denies the allegations that he inappropriately touched his daughter and 
claims his ex-wife falsely made the accusation to gain custody of their daughter, because 
she wanted their daughter to go to private school. He self-reported the information 
regarding the accusation to his facility security officer (FSO).2 
 
In May 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. In response to 
relevant questions, he reported a number of delinquent accounts, including the $150 
collection account and student loan debt in collection status referenced in SOR 1.e and 
1.g, respectively. Applicant became aware of the delinquency involving the student loan 
debt in 2013. The outstanding balance on the student loan debt has grown to $33,500.  
 
Applicant promised during his September 2015 security clearance interview that 
he was going to address his past-due debts, including the $150 collection account and 
his delinquent student loan account. He again promised in his August 2016 Answer that 
he was going to take action to address the six SOR debts that he admits. These six debts 
total about $50,000. He presented no documentation showing what, if any, efforts he has 
made to address and resolve these six debts.  
 
The three SOR debts that Applicant denies in his Answer, two collection accounts 
(1.b and 1.h) and his delinquent child support account (1.d), are listed on Applicant’s 
credit reports.3 Applicant claims that his child support payments are automatically 
deducted from his pay and he is current on this obligation. He provided no supporting 
documentation, such as a current statement from the child support enforcement agency. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards).4 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
                                                          
2 Item 5 at 34-35; Item 10 at 5-6; Item 9.  
 
3 Item 6 at 2, number 3.1 (SOR 1.b - $2,700 collection account for attorney fees) and 8.1 (SOR 1.d - $415 
child support collection account). Item 7 at 6 (SOR 1.h - $332 collection account). 
 
4 Nonetheless, I considered the previous version of the guidelines, which were in effect when the SOR was 
issued, and my ultimate conclusion would have been the same. 
 
4 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.5 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
  
                                                          
5 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is put on notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.6 
 
 Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise sensitive information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information.7 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions listed under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012). 
 
6 
Applicants are not required to be debt free. They are also not required to resolve 
all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the debts listed in the SOR first. 
However, they are expected to present evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate security 
concerns raised by their conduct and circumstances, to include the accumulation of 
delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they manage their 
finances in a manner expected of all prospective and active clearance holders.8  
 
Here, Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. His current 
financial problems appear to be, in part, attributable to the financial fallout from the 
dissolution of his former marriage. However, based on the limited evidentiary record, I 
cannot find that the high financial expenses he incurred in relation to the recent child 
custody litigation was a matter largely beyond his control. Specifically, insufficient 
evidence was provided to find that Applicant was at fault, i.e., that he sexually assaulted 
his daughter, or was falsely accused of a heinous act with his minor daughter by his ex-
wife as a means to gain sole custody of their daughter.9 Nonetheless, what is clear is that 
Applicant has yet to take responsible action to address his financial problems and take 
control of his finances. 
 
Of note, Applicant has been gainfully employed since 2004, except for a month of 
unemployment in 2012. He was hired by his current employer in September 2012, and 
throughout the security clearance process promised to take action to address his past-
due debts, including a relatively minor $150 collection account. He provided no 
documentation showing what action, if any, he has taken to address and resolve his past-
due debts or regarding the current state of his finances. He also presented no evidence 
that would undercut the reliability of the evidence submitted by the Government to 
establish the SOR debts10 or to substantiate the basis of his dispute regarding any of the 
SOR debts. See generally ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2016) (“It is 
reasonable for Judges to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of individual debts.”)11 
 
Accordingly, based on the record evidence, I find that AG ¶¶ 19(a) – 19(c) apply. 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Security concerns raised by Applicant’s 
financial situation remain.12 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
9 This specific finding does not prevent the Government from gathering and presenting evidence regarding 
the serious allegations of child sexual abuse in a reapplication-type scenario. See generally ISCR Case 
No. 14-03986 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2017). 
 
10 Notwithstanding recent reports that a major credit reporting agency was hacked, in DOHA proceedings 
adverse information contained in a credit report is sufficient to prove a disputed SOR allegation. The burden 
then shifts to an applicant to rebut or mitigate the negative security implications raised by such evidence. 
ISCR Case No. 14-03910 at 2 (App. Bd. June 24, 2015); ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011). 
 
11 See also ISCR Case No. 15-05478 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017) (judge erred in accepting applicant’s self-
serving assertions that he had resolved financial issues without corroborating documentary evidence). 
 
12 In reaching this adverse decision, I considered that Applicant self-reported the information about the child 
sex abuse allegations to his FSO and the favorable reference letters attached to his Answer. However, 
these favorable whole-person matters are insufficient, whether considered individually or collectively with 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
the other favorable record evidence, to mitigate the security concerns at issue. See generally AG ¶ 2. I also 
considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case.  
