 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03551 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant mitigated concerns raised by his decision to 
default on his mortgage loan in 2013. He has since settled the deficiency balance, 
which the creditor accepted as satisfaction of the debt. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 13, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on February 26, 2016. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on March 18, 2016, and provided a response. The documents 
appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The 
document provided by Applicant is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. On October 
25, 2017, I opened the record to allow the parties to submit additional information. 
Applicant’s submission is admitted as AE B. All documents are admitted without 
objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, a pipe fitter, has worked for a federal contractor since December 2003. 
He completed a security clearance application in July 2014. The ensuing investigation 
revealed that Applicant is indebted to two creditors for $32,500 in delinquent accounts. 
Both accounts are related to the voluntary repossession of a trailer home. 
 
 Applicant purchased the trailer home in 1998 for $40,000. In 2013, Applicant 
decided he wanted to purchase another home. When he tried to sell the trailer home, 
Applicant claims that he learned that the property was secured by an interest-only loan. 
After 13 years of payments, he still owed the full principal balance on the loan. He also 
discovered that the trailer was worth less than he owed. When Applicant purchased his 
current home in November 2013, he stopped paying the mortgage loan and lot rent and 
voluntarily surrendered the trailer to the lender. Before surrendering the property, 
Applicant made sure the lot rent was current. He believed the bank would be 
responsible for any future rent. Applicant believes the bank sold the trailer in April 2014. 
He did not learn of the $747 judgment for the lot rent until after he completed the 
security clearance application.  
 
 In April 2016, Applicant received a settlement offer for the deficiency balance on 
the loan. He accepted the offer, settling the debt for $13,500 the same month. The 
creditor considers the account paid in full. Aside from the accounts alleged in the SOR, 
Applicant does not have a history of financial problems.  
  
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.3  
 
In deciding to default on his mortgage loan and lot rent, Applicant demonstrated 
an “unwillingness to pay his creditors, regardless of his ability to do so.”4 He has since 
resolved the deficiency balance on the mortgage by accepting a settlement offer made 
by the creditor. Applicant does not have a history of financial problems. The 
circumstances that led to Applicant’s default were not borne of financial difficulty, but 
confusion as he sought to sell one home and purchase another. Applicant’s decision 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 AG ¶ 19(b).  
 
 
4 
 
was an isolated financial incident that happened almost four years ago. His actions do 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.5  
 
After reviewing the record, I find that Applicant is a suitable candidate for access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant has resolved the larger of the two SOR debts. 
Although the second debt remains unresolved, it is unlikely that such a small account, 
$747, can be used as a source of vulnerability or exploitation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
