 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07356 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline D, sexual 
behavior, Guideline M, use of information technology, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline D, Guideline 
M, and Guideline E. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 23, 2016, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 27, 2017, and the hearing was 
held as scheduled on June 20, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s Exhibit list 
was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A and 
B, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 28, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer, he admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with 
explanations, except for SOR ¶ 1.d, which he denied. The admissions are adopted as 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is single and has no children. He has worked for a 
defense contractor since October 2013. He has a bachelor’s degree.2   
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant: (1) took and saved semi-nude photos of two 
girlfriends while they were sleeping, without their consent, sometime in 2007 or 2008 
and 2009 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b); (2) had nonconsensual sexual relations with a girlfriend 
in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c); (3) in 2009 and 2010, set up and used his laptop computer to 
video record two women in the bathroom when they were showering without their 
knowledge or consent (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e); (4) in 2014, had sexual relations with a 
girlfriend in public, in a foreign country (SOR ¶ 1.f); and (5) in July 2008 and February 
2009, used a key logger on his computer to gain access to two girlfriends’ email and 
social media accounts without their consent (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). All this conduct was 
cross alleged as personal conduct under Guideline E in the SOR. (SOR ¶ 3.b). The 
SOR also alleged that in 2009 Applicant withheld information during an initial polygraph 
examination (SOR ¶ 3.a).  
  
 During his background interview by a defense investigator in July 2014, Applicant 
admitted that in 2007 or 2008, he took photos of his then girlfriend while she was 
sleeping topless. He took these photos without her knowledge or consent. He kept 
these digital photos until sometime in 2012. He admitted to the investigator that he 
engaged in the same conduct in 2009 with a different girlfriend. He also stated that at 
the time he took the pictures, he did not think any harm had been done. He now realizes 
that taking these pictures without their consent violated their privacy rights. Applicant 
admitted to the investigator that in both December 2009 and 2010, he was staying with 
a mixed-gender group of friends in a hotel room and he set up his computer in the 
bathroom to video record two women while they showered. He was sexually attracted to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 Tr. 5; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
these women. Neither woman had knowledge of the video recording or consented to it 
when he made them. He claims he did not show the recording to anyone else. He has 
never told the women about the secret recordings he made or apologized to them for 
secretly recording them. He claims he destroyed the recordings in 2012. During his 
testimony, he acknowledged violating these women’s privacy rights.3   
 
 During Applicant’s background investigation, he admitted using an information 
technology system (key logger software) in 2008 and 2009 to gain access to two 
girlfriends’ email and social media accounts without their knowledge or consent. He was 
insecure about his relationship with these girlfriends, so he allowed them to use his 
computer to access their email and social media accounts. When they used his 
keyboard, his key logger program was able to capture the secure data to access their 
accounts, which allowed him to secretly gain entry to these accounts. He then viewed 
the girlfriends’ accounts without their knowledge or consent. He blamed his action on 
insecurity and immaturity. During his testimony, he stated that he was confronted by 
one girlfriend about his actions of gaining access to her accounts without consent and 
he initially denied that he did so, but later admitted it to her. He has never let the second 
former girlfriend know that he gained access to her accounts without her permission.4       
 
 In 2009, Applicant sought a security clearance from another government agency 
(OGA). He was interviewed and required to take a polygraph examination. During this 
exam, Applicant was asked if he had ever cheated on an academic test. He answered 
“no,” which was a false answer that he knew to be false at the time he gave it. Applicant 
also admitted that he would lie to friends on a regular basis about his life experiences. 
According to him, he has become more aware of this and starting in 2013, he is less 
comfortable with lying so frequently. To hold himself accountable, he began writing 
down all the lies he told people. He has never received counseling for this issue.5 
 
 Applicant denied having nonconsensual sexual relations with his girlfriend in 
2009. His denial is corroborated by a statement from that girlfriend where she asserts 
that the sexual activity that occurred was consensual. Applicant described the sexual 
activity in 2014 in a foreign country as occurring on a private beach, at night, with no 
other people around.6           
 
 Applicant presented a reference letter from a supervisor who recommends 
Applicant for a security clearance because of the value having a clearance will bring to 
the company’s customers. He also believes Applicant has grown in technical ability as 
well as in leadership.7    
                                                          
3 Tr. 32, 40-43, 52; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 44-46, 50-51; GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. 28-29, 48-49; GE 2; Answer. 
 
6 Tr. 26-27, 30; AE A. 
 
7 AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he has learned from his past immature action and 
changed his behavior. He is engaged and has a healthy relationship with his fiancée. 
He also volunteers in a community program to help victims of sexual assault.8    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
8 Tr. 34, 37 
 
5 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern under the guideline for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 
12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
 Applicant took explicit photos and videos of women without their knowledge or 
consent and kept the digital photos and recordings. Such violations of privacy constitute 
criminal behavior in many jurisdictions. Applicant’s actions in this regard show a lack of 
discretion and judgment. AG ¶¶ 13(a) and 13(d) both apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for sexual behavior under 
AG ¶ 14 and considered the following potentially relevant:   
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment;  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is private, consensual, and discreet; and 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has received a 
 
6 
 
 
favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional indicating 
the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
  Applicant’s inappropriate sexual actions occurred a number of years ago. 
However, he has not accepted full responsibility for his conduct by informing the victims 
of his actions and apologizing to them. He also presented insufficient evidence that 
future similar behavior would not occur because he has not dealt with his problem 
through counseling or therapy. His lack of rehabilitative action casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(e) do not apply. Applicant 
presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the conduct described in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f, 
but the record evidence supports that his remaining conduct, concerning taking pictures 
and videos, was non-consensual. AG ¶ 14(d) applies, in part, as described above.  
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially relevant: 
(a) unauthorized entry into any information technology system; 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain access to another 
system or to a compartmented area within the same system; and   
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
 Applicant used a key stoke software system on his computer to gain access to 
two women’s personal email and social media accounts without their knowledge or 
consent. All the above conditions are applicable.  
  
 I reviewed all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41, and I considered the 
following relevant:  
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.   
 
 Although some time has passed since Applicant violated these two women’s 
privacy, he has not shown the rehabilitative qualities necessary to establish changed 
behavior. He has not told one of the women what he did and only told the other woman 
when she confronted him and he initially denied his actions. He has not sought 
professional counseling for his behavior. Future recurrence cannot be ruled out. Without 
any rehabilitative progress, his actions cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 41(a) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
8 
 
 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
Applicant deliberately failed to provide truthful information during a polygraph 
interview in 2009. His actions in taking explicit pictures and videos of women without 
their knowledge or consent constitutes dishonest, untrustworthy, and unreliable 
behavior. He has an acknowledged pattern of lying to others. Both of the above 
conditions apply.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and found the 
following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Applicant’s false statement during a polygraph interview and his acknowledged 
pattern of lying to others is not minor. Since he has presented no evidence of 
counseling to deal with his aberrant behavior, the possibility of recurrence is present 
and his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment are questionable. AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s youth at the 
time of his actions, the passage of time since then, his current engagement, his 
community volunteerism, and his other personal circumstances. However, I also 
considered that he violated the privacy rights of four women without their knowledge or 
consent by using his technical skills to gain access to their personal information or 
record their activities for his own gratification. He lied to an OGA and is a confessed liar. 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the sexual conduct, use of 
information technology, and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines D, M, and 
E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs   1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph     1.c:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs   1.d – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph     1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs   2.a – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs   3.a – 3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
