 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-06018  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the alcohol and criminal conduct allegations related to two 
charges of driving under the influence of alcohol. Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
remand order, and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 29, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On March 19, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. (Item 1.) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006. 
  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
May 16, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete 
copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to 
Applicant on that day. He received it on May 19, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that 
he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. He did not file any objection to the 
Government’s FORM or submit additional information. DOHA assigned the case to me 
on March 27, 2017. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence.  
 
 On May 17, 2017, I issued a Decision denying Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance on the basis that he failed to mitigate the alcohol and criminal conduct 
allegations related to two criminal charges of driving under the influence of alcohol. 
Applicant appealed. On August 9, 2017, the Appeal Board remanded the case to me to 
consider documents Applicant attached to his appeal brief, which he had previously 
submitted in reply to the FORM, but were not included in the file or noted in my Decision. 
I received the Remand Order on August 10, 2017, and the file and exhibits on August 17, 
2017. I marked the exhibit as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. It has nine pages.1   
 
Remand Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. (Item 2.) His admissions are 
incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and unmarried. He has a 20-year-old daughter. He began 
working with his employer in April 2013. (Item 2.)  
 
 On July 2, 2009, Applicant was charged with operating a motor vehicle under the 
influence (OUI) and resisting arrest. His blood alcohol content (BAC) was over the legal 
limit. He plead guilty to the OUI. In addition to being fined, the judge ordered him to attend 
OUI classes for 20 hours. His driver’s license was suspended for 30 days. (Items 4, 5.) 
 
 On September 8, 2013, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence 
(DUI). His BAC was over the legal limit. On April 15, 2014, he was convicted of DUI and 
fined. He was ordered to complete a DUI program with a state agency and his driver’s 
license was suspended. On April 17, 2014, he paid a $644 fine. On April 30, 2014, he 
completed the DUI program through a state counseling agency. His license was 
reinstated on May 5, 2014. (AE A at 1, 5, 7.)  
 
 In his April 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that he did not intend to make excuses 
for the OUI or DUI charges. He said he is not an excessive drinker and no longer drives 
after consuming alcohol. He has been the “lead person for 2 ½ years by a majority vote 
of my coworkers and supervisors.” (Item 1.) He attributed the two offenses to extenuating 
                                                 
1 The Decision issued on May 17, 2017, applied the AGs in effect as of September 1, 2016. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented. This Remand Decision applies the new AG.   
 
 
3 
 
 
circumstances, involving his former partner, which were devastating for him. In July 2009, 
she was diagnosed with cancer, and he had difficulty handling his emotions. In August 
2013, she died, and he suffered another emotional breakdown, contributing to the 
September 2013 DUI. He acknowledged that those circumstances did not “justify [his] 
actions.” (AE A at 1.) Since then he has completed treatment and counseling for alcohol 
and bereavement. He continues to accept responsibility for his actions and mistakes. (AE 
A at 1.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the 
context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
4 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
AG ¶ 22 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
Applicant admitted that he was charged with an OUI in 2009 and a DUI in 2013. 
He was convicted of both crimes, which involved the consumption of alcohol to the point 
of legal intoxication. The evidence raised both disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted 
to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 23 
provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.  
 
Applicant stated that both charges occurred as a consequence of his inability to 
manage his emotions after learning of his partner’s cancer and later death. These were 
unusual circumstances, such that they cast minimal doubt on his current reliability. There 
is some evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 23(a). Applicant acknowledged his 
mistakes and takes responsibility for them. AG ¶ 23(b) does not fully apply because he 
did not present sufficient evidence addressing his current consumption habits. In 2014 
Applicant completed the counseling program he was ordered to participate in after being 
convicted for the 2013 charge. Applicant said he also participated in bereavement 
counseling to deal with the loss of his partner, which contributed to his alcohol 
consumption at the time of the offenses. The evidence establishes some mitigation under 
AG ¶ 23(d).   
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant was charged twice for alcohol-related offenses, and convicted for both 
of them. He admitted the allegations. The evidence established both disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised in 
this case: 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
There is evidence to establish partial mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a) as explained 
under AG ¶ 23(a) above. The evidence also establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 
32(d). Applicant accepted responsibility for the offenses and expressed remorse. He 
stated that he performs well in his employment position. He provided evidence that he 
completed a court-ordered counseling program, had his driver’s license reinstated, and 
paid the fines imposed on him for the 2013 conviction. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 47-year-old 
mature adult, who takes responsibility for his choices and conduct that underlie the 
security concerns alleged in the SOR. He explained the unusual circumstances 
surrounding his two alcohol-related crimes and presented evidence of rehabilitation. 
Overall, the record leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s current eligibility for a 
 
 
7 
 
 
security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. 
 
Remand Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                 For Applicant 
 
Remand Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                 
 
   
            SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
