 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-02074  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant owes more than $18,000 in delinquent debt. He offered insufficient 
evidence of efforts or means to resolve his debts, or to establish rehabilitation. Resulting 
security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 6, 2012, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On November 17, 2015, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 16, 2015, and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On March 9, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on March 10, 2016, and received by him on March 16, 2016. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not 
file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond 
the 30-day period he was afforded. Items 1 through 7 are admitted in evidence. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of 
SEAD 4. I considered the 2006 adjudicative guidelines, as well as the SEAD 4 AG, in 
determining Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, but this decision is issued pursuant to the SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 55 years old and divorced, with two adult children. He earned an 
associate’s degree in 1993. He has no military or federal civil service. He has been 
employed as a design engineer by a defense contractor since 2001, and is seeking to 
renew the security clearance he has held since 2002 in connection with that position. 
(Item 3; Item 7.)  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, which 
he said he did not recognize but believed might be the same as the debts alleged in ¶¶ 
1.k and 1.l. My examination of the record credit report entries, upon which the SOR 
allegations are based, convinces me that the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are more 
recent reports reflecting the newly spun-off student loan servicing company, rather than 
the original lending organization, as the creditor; and reporting different balances due. 
Applicant admitted owing these student loan debts, but did not claim that he made 
payments toward them or offer evidence that would explain the different reported 
outstanding balances. Record evidence indicates that the ten debts to which he 
admitted total $18,555; range from $54 to $7,736; and became delinquent between 
2008 and 2014. (Item 2; Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant said that his financial problems originally stemmed from expenses that 
he and his then-wife incurred for her to obtain and maintain real estate training and 
licensing requirements starting in 2008. He and his wife separated in October 2009, and 
their divorce was final in August 2011. The expenses of living separately further strained 
his finances. Subsequently, Applicant suffered some health problems, including a heart 
attack in 2013. Applicant did not provide details concerning the extent to which these 
events specifically affected his financial situation, or how he attempted to responsibly 
manage those effects. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant said in his 2012 e-QIP that he intended to start addressing his 
delinquent debts, but provided no evidence of either payments or other arrangements 
made to resolve any of them since then. He has not obtained financial counseling. He 
provided no budget information from which to predict his future solvency, or his ability to 
make payments toward his delinquent debts. He offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning the level of responsibility his duties entail in his defense contractor work, or 
his track record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of 
security procedures there. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has incurred more than $18,000 in delinquent debts since 2008. He 
documented neither the ability nor efforts to satisfy these ten debts, including one for 
only $54. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s multiple delinquent debts are substantial and ongoing. His failure to 
address any of these debts in a meaningful way over the past nine years creates 
ongoing concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no 
reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not continue or recur. Mitigation 
was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant neither documented which delinquent debts arose from circumstances 
beyond his control, nor showed that he acted responsibly under such circumstances, as 
required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He offered no evidence of financial counseling 
 
 
6 
 
 
or budget information establishing solvency going forward or ability to repay his 
delinquencies. He failed to demonstrate that theses problems are being resolved, are 
under control, or that a good-faith effort toward resolution has actually been initiated. 
Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under 
the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $18,000 in 
delinquent debts, and demonstrated no progress in resolving them despite declaring his 
intent to do so in his 2012 e-QIP. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress 
remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet 
his burden to mitigate security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.k and 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
