 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02998 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan, and Applicant maintains a 
bank account there. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on October 11, 2012. On December 16, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B: Foreign Influence, and Guideline 
C: Foreign Preference. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
 
2 
 
 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new adjudicative guidelines (AG) were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 29, 2016. She admitted all of the SOR 
allegations except ¶ 2.b, concerning her father, and requested that her case be decided 
by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On September 
1, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 16 Items, was mailed to Applicant on 
September 2, 2016, and received by him on September 16, 2016.2 The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not 
submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection to its 
contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period she 
was afforded. On August 14, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned the case to me. Items 1 through 4 are admitted into evidence. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Taiwan, as set forth on pages 6 and 7 of the FORM. He submitted Items 5 through 
16 as attachments to the FORM in support of this request. Applicant offered no objection 
to Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice. Accordingly, I will take 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the Government’s request, which are 
supported by source documents from official U.S. Government publications. Those facts 
are incorporated by reference and summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. She has worked as a data engineer for a major defense 
contractor since August 2012, and is seeking her first security clearance in connection 
with that employment. She has never married and has no children. She has no prior 
military or Federal civil service. (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant was born in the United States to parents from Taiwan. Her parents were 
both citizens and residents of Taiwan in October 2012, when she submitted her e-QIP.3  
By the time she answered the SOR in January 2016, her parents had divorced and her 
mother had remarried. Her father died in April 2014. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 Items 5 through 16 are portions of U.S. Government documents attached to the FORM in support of 
Department Counsel’s request for Administrative Notice pertinent to Taiwan.  
 
3 Department Counsel’s statement, “Applicant’s mother and father are citizens of and reside in India,” on 
page 8 of the FORM, is obviously a typographical error since it is unsupported by any record evidence, and 
all of his other comments properly reflect their Taiwanese heritage. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was raised and educated in Taiwan until age 14. She has no siblings, 
and her mother has never worked outside their home. In 2004 her father was assigned to 
move from Taiwan to Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, to organize and open a new branch for 
the commercial bank that employed him as a manager. Applicant and her mother moved 
with her father to Vietnam, and she attended an American international school there from 
2004 until April 2007. She then moved to the United States, lived with a guardian, and 
completed high school in June 2008 at a private academy of science and technology. She 
then attended a U.S. university until August 2012, and earned a Bachelor of Science 
degree. (Item 3.) 
 
  In 2008, Applicant’s parents applied for a Taiwanese passport for her without her 
knowledge. They told her that it would serve as a visa permitting her to return to Taiwan 
for visits, but she never used it. She said that she does not think that it means that she 
has dual citizenship, which she denies having. The passport is due to expire in June 2018, 
and she indicated her willingness to surrender or destroy it. (Item 2; Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant’s parents also opened a bank account for her in Taiwan while she was 
a minor. She was unaware of the balance in the account when she reported it on her 2012 
e-QIP, but estimated it might contain about $500. After her father died in 2014, she 
opened two new bank accounts in Taiwan to enable the transfer of her inheritance. She 
also inherited her father’s house in Taiwan. She still owns that house, and allows her 
mother and stepfather to live in it. She has no intention to live there, and now lives in a 
house she bought near her U.S. place of employment in August 2015. (Item 2; Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant freely disclosed all of the foregoing information about her Taiwanese 
property and family members. The information she provided did not include the value of 
her recently inherited financial and real estate assets in Taiwan, or information concerning 
her new stepfather’s professional and employment history. No intention to conceal such 
information is suggested, but the record is devoid of evidence that would support findings 
about those matters. She reported that she maintains monthly contact with her mother in 
person, telephonically, or through other electronic media. She said that her stepfather is 
also a resident citizen of Taiwan, but did not indicate how much, if any, contact she has 
with him. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence concerning the level of responsibility her duties 
entail, the nature of her performance evaluations, or her track record with respect to 
handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to 
evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her 
case decided without a hearing. 
 
I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in Department Counsel’s request 
concerning Taiwan, which are incorporated herein by reference as noted above. Of 
particular significance are Taiwan’s active, persistent, and illegal collection of restricted 
dual-use technologies, and U.S. classified information. There have been numerous cases 
involving actual or attempted espionage and the illegal export of information by targeted 
U.S. citizens and permanent residents with connections to Taiwan and China. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three of them are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;4  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government; its relationship with the United States; and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant is vulnerable 
to foreign government coercion or inducement. Although Taiwan has a democratic 
                                                          
4The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
6 
 
 
government and is a U.S. ally, the risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is heightened 
in this case because Taiwan is known to conduct intelligence collection operations and 
industrial espionage against the United States. These facts place a significant burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her connections and relationships with her 
mother, who is a resident citizen of Taiwan, and her bank account there do not create a 
heightened risk of foreign influence or pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed 
in a position where she might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and to her family or property in Taiwan. Applicant’s immediate-family relationships are 
presumed to be close and loving, and Applicant offered no evidence to the contrary about 
her family. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 
and 7(f).  
 
The Government met its burden of production by raising the above disqualifying 
conditions and shifted the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. AG ¶ 8 lists six 
conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Those with potential 
application in mitigating the security concerns in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
Applicant did not demonstrate that it is unlikely that she could be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual or government 
and those of the United States as a consequence of her ongoing family ties and property 
interests in Taiwan. She is her mother’s only child, and her mother is her only close 
relative. They maintain monthly contact, and her mother lives with her stepfather in the 
home that Applicant inherited after her father died in 2014. The record does not establish 
the value of Applicant’s inherited real estate and financial assets in Taiwan, but she did 
not demonstrate that they are insignificant in terms of security risks. She opened two new 
 
7 
 
 
bank accounts to enable the transfer of her inherited funds. Her father was a manager in 
an international commercial bank and the house she inherited is her mother’s only place 
of residence. A conclusion that those assets are not substantial and important to her is 
not supported by the record. Accordingly, she failed to establish the mitigating conditions 
set forth in AG ¶¶ 8(a), (c), or (f). 
 
Applicant provided some evidence of her relationships to the United States, which 
established partial mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b). She was born in the United States and 
chose to return here to complete her last year of high school and attend college. She has 
only used her U.S. passport during her many years of living and traveling abroad. After 
graduating from college in 2012, she accepted employment from a U.S. defense 
contractor and purchased a home here. However, she demonstrated no significant 
personal connections other than to her family members in Taiwan, and her U.S. assets 
were not shown to be more substantial than those she holds in Taiwan. 
 
Guideline C: Foreign Preference 
 
 The Foreign Preference guideline in effect at the time the SOR was issued 
included potentially disqualifying conditions relating to dual-citizenship and possession of 
an active foreign passport. The new Guideline C criteria, which came into effect on June 
8, 2017, and control this national security eligibility determination, explicitly state that dual 
citizenship or the exercise of any right or privilege thereof (including holding a foreign 
passport) is not disqualifying without an objective showing that they are in conflict with 
U.S. national interests or the individual attempts to conceal such facts. No Guideline C 
foreign preference security concerns are raised or supported by substantial evidence in 
this case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
8 
 
 
      I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence tending to mitigate the established foreign influence 
security concerns under the whole-person concept. Applicant is an educated and mature 
individual. She is a natural-born U.S. citizen who chose to return to the United States at 
age 17 to complete her education and begin her professional career. She purchased a 
home here. There is no evidence that she has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States, and she has worked for a major defense contractor 
since 2012.  
 
Other circumstances outweigh those favorable factors for Applicant in the whole-
person analysis. Taiwan’s government, and private companies there, actively engage in 
industrial and military espionage against United States interests, and have historically 
used U.S. citizens and legal residents with ties to Taiwan for this purpose.  Applicant was 
raised and educated in Taiwan during her childhood. Her parents are and were resident 
citizens of Taiwan. She maintains regular contact with her mother in person, through 
phone calls, and by other electronic means. Her mother and stepfather live in the house 
in Taiwan that she inherited from her father in 2014, and she maintains the financial 
portion of her inheritance in two bank accounts there. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the context of the 
whole-person, and considering the facts and circumstances established by the evidence 
in this record, I conclude Applicant did not sufficiently mitigate the security concerns 
pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as 
to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
