 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-08146 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate alleged foreign influence 
security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to and contact with her relatives 
residing in Israel and her in-laws in Lebanon raised a security concern under the foreign 
influence guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
 By agreement of the parties, the hearing was held on May 23, 2017. Also, at 
Applicant’s request, I convened a joint hearing for Applicant and her spouse, because 
their cases raised similar security concerns. Applicant, her spouse, and a number of 
colleagues and friends testified at the hearing. The exhibits offered by the parties were 
admitted into the administrative record without objection.2  
                                                          
1 The SOR also alleged foreign preference security concerns, but the Government’s motion to withdraw 
that allegation was granted and will not be further discussed. 
 
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 3; Applicant’s Exhibits A – H. Correspondence, the notice of hearing, the case 
management order were marked Appellate Exhibits I – III. 
 
2 
 
 On July 12, 2017, Applicant’s counsel requested that the record be re-opened. 
Without objection, the record was re-opened and Applicant’s counsel submitted the 
decision of another government agency (AGA) reversing its prior decision revoking 
Applicant’s husband’s eligibility for access to classified information. The AGA found that 
alleged foreign influence concerns raised by Applicant’s husband’s connections to and 
contact with his family in Lebanon and his wife’s family in Israel were mitigated.3  
 
 On July 13, 2017, after considering the entire record, including the parties’ 
respective positions,4 I notified both sides that the case appeared appropriate for 
summary disposition in Applicant’s favor. See generally ISCR Case No. 15-03176, n.2 
(App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (benchmark that administrative judges can use in deciding 
whether summary disposition is warranted in a given case). Department Counsel objected 
to resolution of the case through summary decision.5 No additional evidence was 
submitted, and the record closed on July 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact6 
 
Applicant was born in Israel. She was the youngest (by several years) of her 
parents’ five children. She excelled academically in school and volunteered with 
organizations dedicated to advancing peace, advocating for human rights, and supporting 
efforts at cross-cultural and cross-religious dialogue. She applied to and was accepted at 
an internationally well-renowned U.S. college, receiving a full academic scholarship. Only 
her late father supported her decision to continue her education and pursue a profession.  
 
At 19, Applicant left her village, traveled to the United States, and began college. 
She was the first woman from her village to attend college in the West. Since then, many 
young women from her village have followed in her footsteps. She earned a bachelor’s 
degree and a master’s degree from U.S. schools, and is currently pursuing another 
advanced degree.  
 
While going to school, Applicant worked part-time to support herself. She primarily 
earned money tutoring others in one of the many languages that she fluently speaks and 
reads. After earning her college degree and before beginning her graduate studies, 
Applicant was selected and worked as a U.S. Congressional fellow. She has been 
working for a U.S. bank since 2013, earning a promotion each year and now is a manager.  
                                                          
3 Appellate Exhibit IV.  
 
4 Transcript (Tr.) at 111 (“Generally there is a presumption that applicant has ties of affection or obligation 
to their immediate relatives; however, with respect to [Applicant], it does not appear as though she 
maintains a close relationship with her immediate relatives in Israel. . . . So in light of all of the evidence 
presented today about disqualifying and mitigating in nature, the government defers to ask judge as to 
whether or not it's clearly consistent with national interest to grant or continue clearances for applicants.”).  
 
5 Appellate Exhibit V. No reason was provided for the Government’s shift in position. 
 
6 Unless otherwise stated, the information herein is taken from:  Tr. 12-20, 33-41, 51-80, 82-110; Exhibit 1; 
Exhibits A - H; Answer, Attachments 1 – 5.  
 
3 
 
In 2015, Applicant received a job offer from a large federal contractor, which has 
employed her husband for many years. She submitted a security clearance application in 
June 2015, in connection with this prospective job offer. The position is contingent on 
Applicant receiving a security clearance.  
 
Applicant reported her foreign relatives on her security clearance application. She 
noted on the application that her father, a retired electrician, was seriously ill. He died 
nine months later. Applicant was not told by her family of her father’s passing until a few 
days after he had died. She last spoke with her mother in March 2016, shortly after her 
father’s death. She did not attend her father’s funeral because, in part, she did not want 
to deal with her siblings.  
 
Applicant last traveled to Israel in 2014. She is willing to renounce her Israeli 
citizenship, as she only kept it in case she needed to travel to Israel to care for her late 
father. Applicant states that she lost the right of residency in Israel some years ago. She 
only holds a U.S. passport, having destroyed her former Israeli passport after becoming 
a U.S. citizen in 2014.  
 
Applicant’s late father left her a 25% interest in the family home in Israel as an 
inheritance. She is entitled to receive this inheritance upon her mother’s death. She is in 
the process of transferring her inheritance to her nephew, who is the son of the brother 
who primarily cared for her father in his final years. She has no interest in the inheritance 
or in mending ties with her family in Israel. In response to Department Counsel’s question, 
Applicant summed her relationship with her family in Israel as follows: 
 
I'll tell you this; I've always been, even in Israel, a kind of person who done 
her own thing and kind of lived in a household doing my own thing. They all 
were older than me and busy with their lives, so in a way kind of that paved 
a road for a relationship not to be the normal sibling relationship. They were 
already adults when I was a child, so I had to kind of find my own way being 
busy with my own books and education and extracurricular activities, so I 
kind of lived with my own world separate from theirs. That doesn't mean that 
if you ask me do I hate them, no I don't have hate for my family in my heart, 
but that doesn't mean that I bless them, I love them from a distance, but I 
understand it's not a relationship that worked out, not every family is the 
perfect family in this world.7 
 
Applicant met her husband in 2007, when they were attending the same graduate 
school. He has worked in the defense industry as a contractor since approximately 2002 
and was granted a security clearance in about 2010. They married in 2009. They had a 
small wedding and invited only their closest friends. Neither invited their relatives. Both 
families had initially voiced their displeasure about who they had chosen to marry. 
Applicant’s mother and siblings objections to her husband are based on their strongly 
held prejudices. Before deciding to marry, Applicant introduced her future husband to the 
American couple that she affectionately refers to as her adopted parents and the 
professor who helped her apply and get a scholarship to attend college in the United 
                                                          
7 Tr. 78. 
 
4 
 
States. At the time, she confided in these close friends that she hoped her family’s 
attitudes towards her husband would change after they married. 
 
Applicant’s husband was born in Lebanon. Applicant’s father and mother-in-law 
are Lebanese citizens, who reside in Lebanon. Her father-in-law is a retired physician. 
Before retiring, he ran his own small private medical practice in Lebanon. Her mother-in-
law attended and graduated from an American university in Lebanon. She received 
financial assistance from the U.S. Government to attend college. Her mother-in-law never 
worked outside the home. Applicant’s husband tries to speak with his parents at least 
every other month. He last traveled to Lebanon over seven years ago. Applicant speaks 
with her in-laws infrequently, maybe once or twice a year on special occasions. She notes 
that, even if she wanted to visit her in-laws, she would be denied entry into Lebanon 
because her U.S. passport reflects she was born in Israel. 
 
None of Applicant’s relatives work for or have any connection to, or association 
with, a foreign government, entity, or group. Applicant and her husband do not currently 
have any foreign financial interests, property, or assets. All of their tangible assets and 
property are in the United States, including their home, bank accounts, and retirement 
savings. They do not provide financial support to any foreign persons, and are not 
financially indebted or beholden to any foreign government, person, entity, or group.  
 
 In addition to working a full-time job and taking courses in pursuit of another 
graduate degree, Applicant is active in her community. Her closest friends are current or 
former cleared federal employees. Persons who have known Applicant since she started 
college, including a former U.S. Ambassador, submitted strong letters of support. The 
collective opinion of these individuals is that Applicant is an honest, reliable, highly 
principled and ethical person who is strongly patriotic and loyal to the United States. 
 
One of Applicant and her husband’s closest friends has worked for the U.S. 
Government in the national security field for several years and has deployed to Iraq on 
multiple occasions. He was one of the few close friends invited to their wedding. He 
provided the following unchallenged opinion about Applicant and her husband: 
 
First off, I would just like to point out that in my opinion and in my experience, 
these individuals [Applicant and his spouse] are as American as you and I, 
as anyone else in this room. They are loyal, dutiful, trustworthy, accountable 
. . . I think the best compliment that I could give them in evidence in the way 
I feel about them -- I explained to you that I spent quite a bit of time in Iraq 
-- I would trust them with my life there, without question.8 
 
  
                                                          
8 Tr. 47-48.  
 
5 
 
Administrative Notice – Israel and Lebanon.9 
 
Israel is a multiparty parliamentary democracy. Israel and the United States have 
historically strong bilateral relations, including cooperation on defense issues. However, 
there have been at least three cases in which U.S. government employees were 
convicted of disclosing classified information to Israel or of conspiring to act as an Israeli 
agent. The most prominent of these cases involved Jonathan Pollard, a former U.S. 
defense analyst, who was convicted of selling classified information to Israel in 1986. 
Following his conviction, the Israeli government granted Pollard citizenship and confirmed 
he was an Israeli agent. U.S. officials remain concerned about possible industrial 
espionage from Israel.  
 
The current State Department travel warning for Israel states that the security 
situation remains complex in Israel and the West Bank and can change quickly. U.S. 
citizens are warned to remain vigilant throughout Israel, as the most significant human 
rights problem impacting the country were terrorist attacks targeting civilians. The travel 
warning states that U.S. citizens should avoid all travel to the Gaza Strip, which remains 
under control of Hamas, a designated foreign terrorist organization.  
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary republic. Lebanon's history since 1943 has been 
marked by periods of political turmoil interspersed with prosperity. The United States 
seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon, and to help preserve its 
independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. The United States, 
along with the international community, supports full implementation of several UN 
Security Council Resolutions, including the disarming of all militias in Lebanon.  
 
The U.S. State Department’s current human rights report on Lebanon reflects that 
civilian authorities generally maintained control over the armed forces and other security 
forces, although Palestinian security and militia forces, the designated terrorist group 
Hizballah, and other extremist elements operated outside the direction or control of 
government officials. It also reflects that the most significant human rights abuses during 
the year were torture and abuse committed by security forces. The report goes on to state 
that although the legal structure provides for prosecution and punishment, government 
officials enjoyed a measure of impunity for human rights abuses. 
 
Furthermore, the State Department’s human rights report notes that despite the 
presence of Lebanese and UN security forces, Hizballah retained significant influence 
over parts of the country, and the government made no tangible progress toward 
disbanding and disarming armed militia groups. Palestinian refugee camps continued to 
act as self-governed entities and maintained security and militia forces not under the 
direction of government officials. 
 
The current State Department travel warning for Lebanon notes that violent 
extremist groups, including Hizballah, operate in Lebanon. The warning also notes that 
there is the potential for death or injury in Lebanon because of terrorist bombings and 
                                                          
9 See generally Exhibits 2 and 3, as updated by current documents posted on U.S. State Department 
website (state.gov) and are appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit VI.  
 
6 
 
attacks. Furthermore, the Lebanese government cannot guarantee the protection of U.S. 
citizens against sudden outbreaks of violence, which can occur at any time in Lebanon. 
Additionally, the U.S. Embassy does not offer protection services to U.S. citizens who feel 
unsafe in Lebanon. Because of these dangerous conditions, the State Department warns 
U.S. citizens to avoid all travel to Lebanon.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards).  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
 
7 
 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.10 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. (AG ¶ 6.) 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.11  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact . . .  with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
                                                          
10 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
11 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
8 
 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”12 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.13 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country facing 
a significant terrorist threat or a country where hostile elements operate somewhat freely 
and significant human rights issues have been reported by the U.S. State Department, 
such an applicant faces a heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their 
connections to and contacts with foreign relatives.14 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
9 
 
 Here, the overwhelming weight of the record evidence favors granting Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance. On the surface, Applicant’s familial ties to Israel and 
Lebanon would seem to raise a security concern. But, in scratching right below the 
surface, the evidence clearly reveals that Applicant’s relationship with her foreign relatives 
is minimal and inconsequential from a security clearance standpoint.15  
 
Of note, Applicant’s only true strong familial bonds to Israel were through her 
father. He was the only member of the family who supported Applicant’s decision to move 
to the United States to pursue her educational and professional dreams. When he died 
over a year ago, Applicant’s already strained relationship with her mother and siblings 
completely fell apart. She has not spoken to her mother since her father died. Her 
relationship with her in-laws appears to be respectful, but distant. Thus, I agree with 
Department Counsel that Applicant rebutted the legal presumption that she has close ties 
of affection and obligation to her foreign relatives.16 
 
Furthermore, although Applicant has not yet had the opportunity to put her 
immeasurable talents and skills to work on behalf of the U.S. Government, the obvious 
strength of character, tenacity, and discipline she has shown to get to this point in her 
young life raise favorable inferences about her ability to properly handle and safeguard 
sensitive U.S. information. Her and her husband’s professional, social, and economic ties 
and loyalty squarely lie with the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) through 8(c) apply.  
 
Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In a Guideline B case 
this assessment necessarily requires a judge to consider the relevant country or countries 
at issue. After considering and weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I 
find that Applicant met her burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating security concerns 
raised by her foreign familial connections.17 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
  
                                                          
15 The Appeal Board has held that “it is the nature of the foreign ties themselves that give rise to a security 
concern.” ISCR Case No. 14-03112 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015). Thus, when the nature of an applicant’s 
relationship to his or her foreign relatives is not close, such distant familial ties do not raise a security 
concern. Otherwise, the mere possession of foreign relatives would stand as a bar to holding a security 
clearance – a position that is not supported by the Directive and Executive Orders. 
 
16 See e.g. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (applicant’s lack of a meaningful relationship 
with and limited contact with foreign relatives supported judge’s favorable Guideline B decision). 
 
17 In reaching this conclusion, I also considered the candor Applicant exhibited throughout the security 
clearance process and the evidence provided by her longtime references. See AG ¶ 2 (whole-person 
concept). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (relevant factors to consider in determining whether granting a person a 
clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of the United States). 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:          For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):  WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:           Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
