 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08430 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 30, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On March 2, 2015 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Government Exhibit 4.)  On February 24, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2017. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
May 23, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing twelve Items, was 
received by Applicant on May 26, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 12 are admitted 
into evidence, and are hereinafter referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 12.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He has been married and divorced and has two 
children.  He is employed with a defense contractor.   He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified ten allegations involving delinquent debts totaling in excess of $20,000, which 
include a Federal tax lien, medical accounts and other consumer debt.   Applicant 
admits allegations 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c., and denies allegations 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 
1.i., and 1.j.  (Government Exhibit 2.)   
 
 From 2007 to March 2015, Applicant was employed by a sheet metal company.  
Between March 1999 to 2007, Applicant was self-employed.  He has never held a 
security clearance, and he has no military service. 
 
 Credit Reports of the Applicant dated March 25, 2015; November 9, 2015; April 
28, 2015; January 18, 2016; and May 15, 2017, indicate his indebtedness to each of the 
creditors listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.)  There is no track 
record of debt resolution efforts or any regular payments made to any creditor despite 
the age of the obligations.   
 
3 
 
 1.a.  Applicant failed to file and pay his Federal income tax returns for tax years 
2007 through 2012, as required.  Applicant admits the debt and states that he has 
satisfied it.  In his e-QIP, he claimed that he owed about $8,000 in Federal taxes and 
was making payments of $500 monthly.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  He provided no 
documentation to support this averment.   
 
 1.b.  Applicant failed to file and pay his state tax returns for tax years 2007 
through 2012, as required.  Applicant admits the debt and states that he has satisfied it.     
In his e-QIP, he claimed that he owed $5,000 in state tax debt.  He also states that he 
was going to set up some payment arrangements for his state taxes but provided no 
documentation to support this averment.  (Government Exhibit 4.)    
 
 1.c.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $757.  Applicant admits the debt and states that 
he cosigned for his daughter’s car and he defaulted on the loan.  (Government Exhibit 
2.)  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been satisfied.   
 
 1.d.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $136.  Applicant states that he is unaware of 
the debt.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied  
 
 1.e.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $100.  Applicant states that he is unaware of 
the account.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  There is no evidence to show that the debt has 
been satisfied.   
 
 1.f.  Applicant is indebted to a telephone company for an account that was placed 
for collection in the approximate amount of $143.  Applicant states that he is unaware of 
the account and that it could be his ex-wife’s.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  There is no 
evidence to show that the debt has been satisfied.   
 
 1.g.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $1,184.  Applicant states that he is unaware of 
the debt.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied. 
 
 1.h.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $625.  Applicant states that he is unaware of 
the debt.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied.   
 
 1.i.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $343.  Applicant states that he is unaware of 
the debt.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied.  
 
4 
 
 1.j.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $49.  Applicant states that he is unaware of the 
debt.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied. 
 
 Applicant claimed that he has satisfied his tax filing obligations and has been 
making payments to resolve his delinquent tax debt, and that he has resolved his 
Federal taxes.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  He has failed to provide documentation 
concerning his filing of income tax returns or the resolution of any tax debt.  Although he 
denied knowing about many of his debts, he failed to provide any dispute to the validity 
of any of his debts.  Of those he admitted, he failed to provide documentation of 
resolution, or any alleged payment plans, settlement offers, or settlement agreements, 
or payments, for any of the remaining debts listed in the SOR.  Applicant has failed to 
establish a track record showing that he has done anything to resolve any of his 
delinquent debt.    
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), Standard Form 86 dated March 2, 2015.  Section 26 asked about his Financial 
Record, specifically, whether in the past 7 years, he had failed to file or pay Federal, 
state or other taxes when required by law or ordinance?  Applicant responded, “YES,” 
and disclosed that he failed to file his Federal and state income taxes for 2011. 
(Government Exhibit 4.)  Applicant failed to disclose that he has also failed to file and or 
pay his Federal and state income taxes for tax years 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2012.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)  Applicant states that he misunderstood the question and put 
the date he started his payment plan for his Federal taxes. (Government Exhibit 2.)   
 
On the same questionnaire, Section 26 asked about Applicant’s Financial 
Record, specifically, whether in the past 7 years, he had a lien placed against his 
property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?  Applicant responded, “NO”.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)  This was a false answer. Applicant had a Federal tax lien 
entered against him in July 2012 for $25,126 that has not been released.  (Government 
Exhibit 10.)  Applicant claims that he thought he answered this question in 26.a. and 
26.b.  (Government Exhibit 2.)    
 
On the same questionnaire, Section 22 asked about Applicant’s Police Record, 
specifically if he ever had been “convicted of an offense involving domestic violence or a 
crime of violence (such as battery or assault) against your child, dependent, cohabitant, 
spouse, former spouse, or someone with whom you share a child in common?. . . Have 
you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?”  (Emphasis in 
original.)  Applicant responded, “YES,” and disclosed his drug charge in January 2005.  
 
5 
 
(Government Exhibit 4.)  He failed to disclose his other drug charges, in May 1989 and 
in November 1993; as well as his domestic violence related convictions in March 1994, 
and September 2006.  Applicant claims that he did not remember all of the dates of the 
offenses.  (Government Exhibit 2.) 
   
   Applicant had an obligation to answer the questions on the application 
accurately.  He provided false information concerning his tax delinquencies, including 
his Federal tax lien, and the full extent of his police record.   The Government relies on 
the representations of the Applicant in response to the questions on the application to 
help determine an applicant’s trustworthiness.  Applicant minimized his answers by 
disclosing only one year that he had not filed or paid his taxes, when in fact it was six 
years.  He also minimized his police record by disclosing only one drug charge, when 
there have been at least four.  In response to the question about the lien, he denied 
having one placed against him, when in fact he currently has an outstanding Federal tax 
lien.  There is no excuse for this carelessness and falsification.  During his subject 
interview, in response to questions by the investigator, Applicant acknowledged having 
tax problems for many years and the IRS freezing his bank accounts in 2013.  He 
claims it caused him to set up a payment plan.  He also acknowledged state tax 
problems, as well as his involvement with the police and domestic violence convictions.  
Applicant was not truthful or honest when answering the questions discussed above.  It 
can be assumed from these responses that he deliberately attempted to conceal this 
information from the government on his security clearance application.    
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks national security eligibility enters into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
7 
 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently fining annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant is indebted to ten separate creditors in an amount totaling in excess of 
$20,000.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
    
  Applicant provided insufficient information concerning his financial affairs that 
demonstrate appropriate mitigation.  There is no evidence of any established payment 
agreements and his ability to follow the agreements to show a systematic method of 
payment.  There is nothing done voluntarily to show that he has done anything to 
resolve his debts.  He states that he set up a payment plan to pay his Federal taxes 
when the IRS froze his account.  The evidence is not clear that any Federal taxes have 
been paid since Applicant’s most recent credit report reflects a Federal tax lien in the 
amount of $25,126 that has not been released.  There is also no evidence of any 
payments made toward his state taxes.  The remaining medical and consumer debt has 
not been addressed, and is still outstanding.  Given these circumstances, there is no 
evidence that he has acted reasonably and responsibly.  His actions demonstrate 
unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant provided false information concerning his tax delinquencies, including 
his Federal tax lien, and the full extent of his police record.   He provided no explanation 
as to why he did not reveal his delinquent indebtedness on his security clearance 
application.  He did not answer the question truthfully, nor did he take the time to 
determine the accuracy of his responses, which shows poor judgment, unreliability and 
untrustworthiness.  There are no applicable conditions that could be mitigating under 
AG ¶ 17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality 
of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
