 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02679 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela, C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. National Security eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
granted. 
 
              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on December 20, 2012. On December 12, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The 
action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued on or after 
that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 9, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 16, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant 
received it on April 10, 2017. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 
through 8. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not provide a response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or 
submit documents. Hence, all Items were admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on September 26, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations cited as SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact:2 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old Information Technology (IT) manager employed by a 
healthcare government contractor since December 2009. He earned a high school 
diploma in June 1974. He was self-employed from September 2003 through December 
2009, at which time he sold his share of the business to his business partner. He was 
married to his first wife for approximately seven years and divorced in 2001. He married 
his current spouse in 2012 and has two adult step children. He is applying for a position 
of trust. 
 
 Applicant listed on his 2012 e-QIP that he failed to pay the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) for tax years 2007 and 2008. He estimated owing a total of $1,329 in 
unpaid taxes and claimed that he was working with the IRS to arrange a payment plan. 
He also disclosed that he had failed to file and pay Federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2010 and 2011. He estimated owing a total of $1,200 for these tax years, and 
claimed that he was working with an accountant to file the proper tax forms. He 
disclosed that the reason for not filing his tax returns was due to “bookkeeping and 
financial issues.”3 
 
 Applicant had been issued Interrogatories by the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals, and he responded to the Interrogatories in October 2016. The Interrogatories 
also included a copy of Applicant’s background interview conducted in January 2013 
with an authorized DOD investigator. In that report, Applicant stated that he experienced 
financial difficulties with his business after the housing market collapsed beginning in 
2007. Due to the loss of income, he did not have enough money to pay taxes in 2007 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 Item 1, 2. 
 
3 Item 3, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
and 2008.  In addition, due to being self-employed, he was unable to pay for an 
accountant to prepare the complicated tax returns for subsequent tax years.  
 
 Applicant admitted that all of his required tax forms had been filed as of October 
17, 2016. He attached Federal tax transcripts for tax years 2007 through 2015. As of 
that date, he owed the IRS approximately $1,191, and owed the state approximately 
$448. It was his intention to resolve all of his tax debt through continuous payments. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. He had not been contacted by any creditor regarding his credit 
card debt, and stated that he intended to have this adverse account removed from his 
credit report. SOR ¶ 1.d.4 
 
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR noted that he had paid his state tax debt in full, 
and had reduced the amount he owed to the IRS for tax year 2015 through regular 
payments. The only debt cited in the SOR that had not been fully resolved was his 
unpaid credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.d/$808). He disclosed that he had been recently 
contacted by a collection agency seeking payment for this debt. He listed that he was 
working with the creditor to resolve this debt.5    
 
I have inferred from Applicant’s SOR Answer and authenticated background 
interview that his financial problems stem from a business downturn. The loss of 
business income caused Applicant to suffer temporary financial hardship until 2009, at 
which time he sold his portion of the business to his business partner. There is no 
evidence that he participated in any type of financial counseling. There is also no 
evidence to indicate that Applicant sought debt consolidation.6 
 
Policies  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility for a public trust 
position, the administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Item 8.  
 
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Item 2.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F; Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
 tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
 required. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty beginning in at least 2007 after his 
business suffered in the housing market. He experienced loss of income and was 
unable to pay his taxes, to hire an accountant to prepare his tax returns, or to pay one 
credit card account. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial problems following a business downturn, 
which was a situation beyond his control. He provided Federal tax transcripts as 
evidence of his actions that he paid Federal taxes and filed his Federal tax returns. He 
paid his delinquent state tax, and he has continued to pay in accordance with an IRS 
payment plan for tax year 2015. He stated his intention to pay his credit card debt in the 
amount of $808. His financial issues are being resolved. Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 
20(a), (b) and (d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
  
Applicant failed to timely file Federal tax returns for 2011 and 2012. He failed to 
pay Federal income taxes due for tax years 2007, 2008, and 2011 through 2015. He 
owed state taxes in the amount of approximately $450. He also failed to pay his credit 
card in the amount of $808, which was then referred for collection. He shows 
rehabilitation in that all of his Federal tax returns have been filed and taxes paid for 
subsequent years. He is paying the IRS on a payment plan for tax year 2015. He stated 
that it was his intention to pay his credit card account. On the whole, he no longer 
demonstrates an attitude of disregard or disdain for his legal obligation to file tax returns 
and pay taxes owed. He has made consistent efforts to resolve his known outstanding 
Federal and state tax issues. 
  
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial and tax concerns 
cited in the SOR. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s national security eligibility 
for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
   
 
                                                   
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
