1 
-            
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-07167 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
       Statement of the Case 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) effective with the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Agent Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, which revised and replaced the 2006 AGs 
and became effective for all decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I 
have applied the new AGs to this decision.1 
1 I considered the previous AGs effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under either version. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2016, with a four page response, 
and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on 
August 30, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on December 6, 2016, and had 30 days 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided a response to the FORM 
comprised of a four-page letter signed December 2, 2016, and 17 attachments marked 
as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through Q, and admitted into evidence. The 
Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 8, is admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is 57-years old. She obtained her bachelor’s degree in 1990. Applicant 
has been employed as a manager by a federal contractor since 1987. She reports no 
military service, and she had a previous security clearance in 1989. Applicant married in 
1984 and divorced in 1994. Applicant disclosed a number of delinquent medical and 
credit card debts in section 26 of her Questionnaire for National Security Positions, also 
known as a security clearance application (SCA) that she signed on December 16, 
2014.3 Applicant stated that she had a number of “debt situations that have been 
magnified by health concerns and hospitalizations.” She was hospitalized five times 
during the last three years for a severe health condition. She was most recently 
hospitalized in November 2014.  
 
Applicant stated in her SCA that she made six monthly payments of $650 in 2012 
to a credit assistance company, which was supposed to distribute this money to three 
major creditors. (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e and one other) She was also making periodic 
payments on her delinquent medical bills and paying $300 per month to the IRS for 
back taxes owed. Applicant’s financial problems began in 2012 when she cashed-out 
her retirement account, and received only $20,000 after paying taxes.4 In her clearance 
interview in June 2015, she stated that she received a letter from the IRS in 2013 
informing her that she owed $9,000 in taxes after making an early withdrawal from her 
retirement account. Applicant mailed $2,000 to the IRS immediately and then she 
started making payments of $300 per month with the final payment made in July 2015. 
She stopped making the $650 monthly payments to the credit assistance company 
because that company was not allocating her money to the original creditors. She 
expects to have all of her delinquent debts paid off by the end of 2017.  
 
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s December 16, 2014 
SCA. (Item 3) and the summary of her clearance interview on September 16, 2015. (Item 4) 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant effectively admitted all of the allegations in 
the SOR of delinquent debts totaling approximately $67,193, with explanations. She 
erroneously proclaimed that SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e, are barred by the statute of 
limitations. This has little or no relevance in a security clearance action. Applicant also 
explained that after 30 years of excellent credit, her credit reports became riddled with 
delinquent medical debts and disputes in 2008. She was prescribed aqua-therapy for 
her diagnosed medical condition, and she used credit cards to pay approximately 
$25,000 for swim spa handicap accommodations at her home. However the swim spa 
company went out of business around the same time that Applicant was being admitted 
to the critical care unit (CCU) about three times a year due to side effects and infections 
from her new drug protocol – for five years ending in 2015.  
 
In her response to the FORM, Applicant explained that her credit history followed 
her health in a downward spiral after she was diagnosed with a serious medical 
condition approximately ten years ago. She has now signed up for a monthly credit 
report service so that she can monitor her credit, and she has been systematically 
contacting her creditors. Applicant has reached a level of homeostasis with her 
condition and need for home nurse visits. So, she has been able to pay down many of 
her medical debts.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($18,821) arose from a charged-off credit card debt. Applicant has 
now reached out to the creditor and she is making progress on a payment plan to settle 
this delinquent debt. SOR ¶ 1.b ($13,080) was a collection account that Applicant has 
disputed. She has provided evidence that she recently entered into an agreement to 
make payments of $338 per month until September 2017 to resolve this debt. She has 
also reached out to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c ($12,491) and provided evidence that his 
debt has been paid in full. Her credit reports reflect a low balance on the charged-off 
debt at SOR ¶ 1.d ($11,360) as Applicant has been making payments pursuant to a 
garnishment order. As of December 2016, she had paid $10,356 on this debt. Her credit 
reports reflect a zero balance on the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e as this credit-card debt 
has been paid off. Applicant is making payments to address the costs not covered by 
health insurance, from her frequent CCU admissions that are reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 
1.g, and 1.h. Lastly, the petty delinquencies alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($65) and 1.j ($43) 
have been paid off.  
 
Applicant has enrolled in a financial-wellness credit-counseling program and she 
is adhering to a budget. She provided medical records to substantiate her diagnosis and 
seven character reference letters, including one from her pastor, which attest to her 
honesty and work ethic. I am satisfied that Applicant now has either paid off her alleged 
delinquencies, or she has a plan in place to do so, and she is making progress. She is 
committed to resolve any remaining delinquent debts by June 2018.  
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
4 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to most of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, with 
explanations. They are also confirmed by her credit reports. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.5  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
a clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft) and 
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                                          
5 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant endured a debilitating medical condition and commensurate medical 
expenses related to multiple hospitalizations. These conditions were beyond her control. 
She has demonstrated that she acted responsibly under the circumstances, including by 
settling many of the alleged delinquencies and disputing a few. She is adhering to a 
good-faith repayment plan on others. Applicant has made concerted efforts to resolve 
the delinquent medical debts and charged-off credit card debts. I am confident that she 
will continue her efforts to resolve any delinquencies. Applicant has met her burden to 
provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are under control, and 
that her debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant’s self-disclosed, charged-off credit card debts, and delinquent medical 
debts, are no longer a security concern. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has met her burden of persuasion. 
The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:             For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
