 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-04415 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not submit sufficient information to overcome the security concerns 
raised by his financial problems. His request for eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 18, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for access to classified 
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the 
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could 
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
On February 28, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). At 
the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision 
in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.2 
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On October 26, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November 16, 2016, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM and the record closed on December 16, 2016.  
 
 I received the case on October 1, 2017. Because so much time had passed 
between Applicant’s response to the FORM and my assignment for a decision, I 
reopened the record on October 26, 2017, and offered Applicant additional time to 
submit updated information in support of his case. Applicant did not provide any 
additional information and the record closed again on November 9, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $30,461 for 19 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.s). Applicant denied the allegations at SOR 
1.k, - 1.m, and 1.o. He admitted the remaining allegations. Applicant also provided 
explanatory remarks with his Answer. In addition to Applicant’s admissions, all of the 
SOR allegations are supported by disclosures he made in his most recent e-QIP as well 
as an e-QIP he submitted in 2008. Also supporting the SOR are credit reports obtained 
in 2014 and 2015, and disclosures made by Applicant in a subject interview on January 
15, 2015. (FORM, Items 2, 4 – 7) 
 
 Applicant is a 66-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom he has 
worked since 1996. He served in the United States Air Force from 1970 until 1974. 
Thereafter, he served in the Army National Guard until 1981. He held a security 
clearance while in the military, and he currently holds a clearance in connection with his 
civilian employment. Aside from a brief period of unemployment in 2010, Applicant has 
been steadily employed for the past 20 years. 
                                                 
2 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on seven enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 - 7). 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was married from August 1973 until divorcing in September 1981. He 
remarried in March 1990 but divorced again in May 2012. When he answered the SOR, 
he indicated he was engaged to be married. Applicant has three adult children from his 
first marriage. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to a combination of expenses related 
to divorce and court-ordered financial support, and unforeseen medical problems. 
During an interview with a government investigator in January 2015, Applicant stated 
his intentions to contact his creditors and resolve his debts. In response to the SOR and 
in response to the FORM, Applicant did not provide any documents that show he has 
paid or that he is paying any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d) of 
the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
                                                 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.9 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s delinquent debts reasonably 
raised the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 
19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the 
ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant did 
not provide any information that supports the mitigating conditions under AG 20. The 
security concerns raised by the adverse information about Applicant’s finances are not 
mitigated.  
                                                 
7 Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
  
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). I have taken due note of 
Applicant’s honorable military service. Nonetheless, doubts about his suitability remain 
because of Applicant’s longstanding financial problems and the fact that he has not 
followed through on his stated intentions to repay his debts. Because protection of the 
interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining 
doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
