 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 15-07438  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Zekiah N. Wright, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
personal conduct concerns raised by his intentional falsification of three questionnaires 
for investigations processing and his deliberate false statements in two background 
interviews between 2012 and 2015. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 22, 2017, I 
issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.2  At the hearing, convened on June 7, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 2017. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Direct of National Security (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded those implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
decided this case under the 2017 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 32, has worked for several federal contracting companies since 2012. 
He has been in his current position as a systems developer since October 2015. He 
started the position as a temporary employee in 2014. In 2012, Applicant was granted 
public trust eligibility. He received a security clearance in June 2013, and applied for an 
upgraded clearance in March 2015. Applicant completed questionnaires for 
investigations processing in 2012, 2013, and 2015. On each application, Applicant 
reported that he earned a college degree in June 2010. He confirmed his degree status 
in February 2012 and May 2015 interviews with background investigators. The most 
recent investigation revealed that Applicant, who attended college between October 
2006 and June 2010, was not awarded a degree. In a follow-up interview in August 
2015, Applicant admitted that he intentionally falsified his April 2015 security clearance 
application and provided false information to the background investigator during his May 
2015 interview.3 
 
In June 2010, Applicant participated in his university’s commencement 
ceremony, knowing that he needed to complete one online course before being 
awarded his bachelor’s of science degree. Applicant decided to start working with the 
intention of completing the class in the future. During his unsuccessful, yearlong job 
search, Applicant realized entry-level positions in his field required a bachelor’s degree. 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and II.  
 
3 Tr. 26, 31. GE 1-6. 
 
3 
 
He began listing a bachelor’s degree on his resume in hopes of securing full-time 
employment, which he did in August 2011. Since then, Applicant applied for and 
obtained three other positions with false education credentials. As of the hearing, 
Applicant had not confessed his deception to his employer or his family members, 
fearing the consequences of revealing the truth.4  
 
Applicant returned to school in February 2017. He is expected to complete his 
degree requirements in June 2017.5  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
` 
Analysis 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
                                                          
4 Tr. 16-25, 28-33, 35, 41-42. 
 
5 Tr. 25-26; AE A.  
 
4 
 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful answers during national 
security investigative or adjudicative process.  
 
Applicant admits disqualifying conduct under the personal conduct guideline, 
specifically: AG ¶ 16(a) the deliberate falsification of relevant facts on a personnel 
security questionnaire used to conduct investigations, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and AG ¶16(b) 
deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an 
investigator involved in making a recommendation relevant to a nation security eligibility 
determination. Between 2012 and 2015, Applicant intentionally falsified three 
questionnaires for investigations processing and made false statements during two 
background interviews regarding his education credentials.  
 
None of the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. Applicant made no 
effort to correct the falsification. He only admitted providing false information to the 
government after being confronted by a background investigator in August 2015. 
Applicant’s falsifications are not minor.  An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, 
and candid answers throughout the investigative process. Anything less provides a 
rational basis for a finding against an applicant’s security worthiness. Here, Applicant 
has repeatedly provided false information to the government for years, establishing a 
history of misconduct. Furthermore, Applicant’s falsifications are ongoing. Applicant has 
chosen not to reveal the truth to his employer or family members. This decision 
exacerbates the concerns about Applicant’s current security worthiness as the 
falsifications remain a potential source of vulnerability and exploitation.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the 
security clearance adjudication is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a 
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable 
security risk.”6 For five years, Applicant has lied to his employers and the government 
about his credentials.  He is neither trustworthy nor reliable, and unlikely to self-report 
derogatory information that may adversely affect his self-interest. These risks cannot be 
ignored and must be resolved in favor of the government. Clearance is denied.  
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
