                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )     ISCR  Case No.  15-03231          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq.
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant  mitigated the security concerns regarding her financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive
(SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were established to supercede all
previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures for
administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DOD
Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated substantive changes in the AGs, effective June
8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would
not change the decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 28, 2015, and requested a hearing. 
The case was initially assigned to other judges (in May 2016 and October 2016,
respectively), and was reassigned to me on March 2, 2017. The case was scheduled for
hearing on April 25, 2017. The Government’s case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4)
Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and 13 exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was received
on May 4, 2017.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with financial updates on the status of
her debts. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the
record. Department Counsel was afforded seven days to respond. Within the time
permitted, Applicant documented a payoff of SOR medical debt ¶ 1.y, updates to her debt
management plan, a summary of her medical insurance coverage, and an affidavit of her
husband detailing his personal background, his marital relationship with Applicant, and
Applicant’s health issues. Applicant’s submissions were admitted without objection as
AEs N-Q.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) incurred a judgment, entered in October
2015 for $1,759 and (b) accumulated 25 delinquent debts exceeding $17,000. Allegedly,
the judgment and delinquent debts remain outstanding.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the listed SOR allegations
with explanations. She claimed that the SOR ¶ 1.a judgment debt was satisfied. She
claimed that SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.z resulted from a combination of major health issues in 2010
and unemployment between February 2013 and October 2013. She claimed, too, that
while unemployed in 2013 she lacked health insurance and could not cover her
accumulated medical  bills with her diminished income.  
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 36-year-old training consultant  for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
2
Background
Applicant met her husband in 2002 while serving aboard a U.S. Navy ship. (AE Q)
She married in May 2007 and has a stepson (age eight) from this marriage. (GEs 1 and 4
and AE Q; Tr. 21) She earned a high school diploma in August 2000 and reported no
post-high school education credits. (GEs 1 and 4) Applicant enlisted in the Navy in
October 2001 and served 25 months of active duty. (GE 1 and AE D) She received an
honorable discharge in November 2003. (GE 1 and AE A and D; Tr. 17-18)
Since September 2013, Applicant has worked for her current contractor. (GE 1; Tr.
36)  Between February 2013 and August 2013, she was unemployed. (GE 1) She was
employed by another defense contractor between July 2005 and February 2013 as a
specification writer before she was fired for alleged overcharging of labor hours while
missing too much work due to health issues. (GEs 1 and 4; Tr. 24-25, 36-37) Previously
(between January 2004 and June 2005), she was employed as a planner for a defense
contractor. (GEs 1 and 4; Tr. 18)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts in 2013 (mostly medical)
following her termination from her defense contractor employer in February 2013. She
encountered serious medical issues in 2010 that contributed to a 2012 diagnosis of an
autoimmune disease that can impact the heart. (Tr. 22-23) While unemployed, she had
no medical insurance of her own, and none from her husband’s employer. Currently, her
medical condition is under control with medication. (Tr. 35)
Applicant’s delinquent debts covered in the SOR included an entered judgment of
$1,759 plus costs and attorneys fees, entered in June 2013, and 25 additional debts. 
Many of the debts (including the judgment covered by SOR ¶ 1.a) have been paid or
resolved: SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a ($1,749), 1.t ($85.00), 1.u ($64), 1.v ($57.00), 1.w ($55), 1.x
($38), 1.y ($34), and 1.z ($200), for a total of $2,392. (GEs 2-4 and AEs M, O, and S; Tr.
28-33). Some of the listed debts are included in Applicant’s  debt-consolidation plan that
she approved in May 2017: SOR debts ¶¶ 1.c ($3,792), 1.d ($1,023), 1.e ($1,013), 1.j
($393), 1.n ($230), and 1.r ($139), for a total of $6,702. (AEs M and T; Tr. 28-33) 
To be sure, many of the listed debts in the SOR have not been paid or otherwise
resolved through payment plans or other payment options: SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b ($5,930), 1.f
($987), 1.h ($693), 1.g ($836),1.i ($502), 1.k ($370), l.l ($278), 1.m ($245), and 1.q
($145), for a total of $12,364. (AEs M and T; Tr. 28-33) After looking at these debts
included in her latest credit report and discussing them with her credit counselor,
Applicant is committed to contacting these creditors to resolve any outstanding balances.
(Tr. 31) Applicant’s assurances are credible and accepted. 
Under the terms of her installment agreement she approved in May 2017,
Applicant agreed to make a start-up payment of $286.90 in May 2017 and monthly
payments thereafter of $211.60 from June 2017 through April 2019. (AE M). She agreed,
3
too, to budget her calculated indebtedness of $4,373 for the completion of her debt-
consolidation agreement, plus any finance charges or interest accruing under the existing
terms of her agreement. (AE M) In her budget plan incorporated in her debt consolidation
agreement, Applicant listed her current monthly income of $3,144 and her husband’s
monthly GI Bill education benefits of $1,600 and teaching position. (AE M) She also
documented her benefits portfolio that covers her medical insurance dental insurance,
vision insurance, and health care temporary tool, which together runs close to $800 a
month. (AE P) Her benefits portfolio includes a health savings account and other
protection plans. (AE P) Applicant fully expects her husband to contribute to her debt
consolidation plan, which he is committed to doing. (AE Q; Tr. 49) 
Applicant calculated her monthly living expenses to total $1,752 and estimated an
additional $1,774 a month to cover her variable and periodic expenses, bringing her total
monthly expenses to $3,526. (AE M) This is a little higher than the $3,139 she estimated
for her monthly expenses in the undated financial statement she furnished. (AE B)  Under
Applicant’s current budget summary included in her debt consolidation plan (which takes
into account a monthly debt payment of $175), she retains a monthly surplus of $1,043. 
Amplifying on her estimated remainder, Applicant indicated she expects a
reduction in her current estimated surplus to just $38.40 under her proposed budget that
factors in her debt consolidation payments (slightly more than the $5.00 monthly
remainder she estimated in the financial statement she provided). Compare the financial
information included in AE M with the information covered in AE B.  
Character references and performance evaluations
Applicant is well-regarded by her coworkers, family members,  and friends. (AEs I-
K) Co-workers credit Applicant with integrity, strong moral values, dependability, and
devotion to her family. They characterized her as honest and forthright in all of her
professional relationships. (AE J) Family members and friends who have known Applicant
for many years describe her as a person of good character who can be trusted with their
children and property interests. (AE I and K) 
Applicant’s past performance evaluations reflect excellent job performance in
support of her employer’s important missions. (AE E) She is credited with exhibiting
excellent problem solving skills and devotion to her employer’s missions. (AE E)  Her
supervisors praised her leadership abilities, hard work and steadfast devotion to duty. (AE
E) Attesting to her strong work ethic, too, is her husband, who credited  her determination
and commitments to her family despite her challenges with medical issues, job loss, and
financial struggles. (AE Q)
Besides her strong character references and performance evaluations, Applicant
provided documentation of her active voter registration, current driving privileges in her
state of residence, evidence of a clean criminal record in her neighboring state, and
evidence of security training. (AEs F-H and L)  
4
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
5
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accrual of delinquent debts (mostly
medical). Applicant’s incurring of delinquent medical and consumer debts in 2013
warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines:
DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19 b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless
of the ability to do so”; and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulation of delinquent
medical and consumer debts negate the need for any independent proof. See
6
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006). Each of Applicant’s delinquent medical
and consumer debts are fully documented in her credit reports and summary of
interview by an investigator of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and they
create some judgment issues. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles her to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Extenuating circumstances (i.e., unemployment and personal medical issues)
have accounted for a good deal of Applicant’s financial problems with her medical and
consumer creditors.  MC  ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” substantially applies to
Applicant’s situation.
Since her return to full-time employment in September 2013, Applicant has made 
considerable progress in addressing her delinquent medical and consumer debts while
facing ongoing medical issues. Most of her medical and consumer debts have either
been paid or are subject to a debt consolidation plan. Applicant is committed to
contacting the remaining creditors listed in her most recent credit report and resolving
any outstanding balances with help from her husband. Applicant’s responsible efforts in
addressing her debts with the limited resources available to her during periods of
unemployment, accompanied by serious medical issues sans medical insurance
coverage, enable her to be credited with meeting the acting responsibly under the
circumstances prong of MC ¶ 20(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005).  
Applicant’s corrective steps taken to resolve her medical and consumer debts
through a combination of payments and a debt consolidation plan enable her to avail
herself of the mitigation benefits of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering
to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” And the
financial counseling and budgeting she completed while enrolled in her debt
consolidation plan, warrant application of MC ¶ 20 (c), “the individual has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a
non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control,” to the facts of her case.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted) In Applicant’s case, her demonstrated responsible efforts in
7
addressing her SOR-listed medical and consumer obligations enable favorable findings
and conclusions to be reached with respect to security concerns raised in connection
with  her security clearance application.
Whole-person assessment is favorable to Applicant. She has shown sufficient 
progress to date in addressing her delinquent medical and consumer debts covered in
the SOR to merit positive overall credit. The contributions she is credited with making to
her company and the defense industry generally, the high regard in which she is held by
her supervisors, coworkers, family members, and friends who have worked closely with
her, should serve her well in working her budget plan. Other positive developments
worth noting are her demonstrated voter registration and driving eligibility and good
standing with law enforcement in her state. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in
addressing her finances and demonstrating her trustworthiness reflect restored financial
responsibility and judgment and resolve questions about her trustworthiness, reliability,
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s medical and consumer debt accruals, most of which she has either paid off
or is resolving through a debt consolidation plan, enough probative evidence of financial
progress following difficult periods of unemployment with accompanying serious medical
issues has been presented to mitigate financial concerns. Conclusions are warranted
that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum
eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. Favorable conclusions are
entered with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.z of the
SOR. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this
case  is consistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
     GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.z                 For Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
security clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
  
10
