 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04027 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 1, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2015, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 (Item 1.) 
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
 On January 27, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the (RSOR), and he 
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)  
On April 21, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
FORM, Department Counsel offered seven documentary exhibits. (Items 1-7.) Applicant 
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on May 29, 2016. Applicant submitted 
additional evidence that has been identified and entered into evidence as Items A 
through D. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on January 26, 2017. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 37 years old, and he is married. Applicant was born in Mexico and is 
a United States citizen. Applicant seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with 
employment in the defense sector. (Item 4.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
The SOR lists 14 allegations (1.a. through 1.n.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The delinquent debts total 
approximately $30,000. All of the SOR allegations were established by the credit reports 
listed as Item 4, 5, and 6. The debts will be discussed below in the order that they were 
listed on the SOR: 
 
On Applicant's Post-FORM submission, he argues that all of the debts listed on 
the SOR, which were first accessed from the credit reports, are not owed by him, and 
that the credit reports are simply incorrect. He cites the fact that the date of birth used 
by some these credit reports are incorrect and there are some variations of his name 
used as well. (Item A.)  
 
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $892. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with a credit reporting agency. (Item 2.) No independent 
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
           
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $246. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with a credit reporting agency. (Item 2.) No independent 
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
  
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $46. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with a credit reporting agency. (Item 2.) No independent 
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
  
 
3 
 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $519. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with a credit reporting agency. (Item 2.) No independent 
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
  
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $866. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with a credit reporting agency. (Item 2.) No independent 
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.  
  
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $14,315. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that 
this matter is being disputed with a credit reporting agency. (Item 2.) No independent 
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.  
 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $4,946. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with the creditor. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.  
 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $2,302. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with the creditor. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.  
 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,907. Applicant denied this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that this education debt 
has been satisfied in full, and he attached a letter confirming that this debt was paid in 
full. (Item 2.) I find that this debt has been resolved. 
 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $468. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with two credit reporting agencies. (Item 2.) No independent 
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,190. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with the creditor. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
1.l. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,078. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with the creditor. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
1.m. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the 
amount of $837. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote 
 
4 
 
that this matter was previously disputed in 2014 with a credit reporting agency. (Item 2.) 
No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been 
resolved or reduced. 
 
1.n. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $456. Applicant denied this debt belongs to him in his RSOR, and he wrote that this 
matter is being disputed with the creditor. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
Applicant provided no independent evidence that all of these SOR debts were 
not his. While he denied that the SOR debts were incurred by him, with the exception of 
the student loan, listed as 1.i., above, Applicant does list several delinquent debts on his 
Security Clearance Application (SCA), signed by him on April 29, 2013. (Item 3.) These 
include: a debt for a repossessed vehicle, a debt for a stolen vehicle, a television cable 
bill, and two credit card debts. There is no evidence that these debts are not some of 
the same debts listed on the SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
  Applicant had many delinquent debts listed on his credit reports for several 
years. Independent evidence was introduced to establish that only one of his significant 
SOR overdue debts have been reduced or resolved. While Applicant contends that all 
but one of the SOR-listed delinquent debts were not incurred by him, no independent 
evidence was introduced to explain how so many debts listed on the credit reports could 
be incorrectly listed. I also considered that Applicant listed several delinquent debts on 
his 2013 SCA that appear to be similar to the SOR debts, and there has been no 
evidence by Applicant that these debts have been resolved. 
 
 
6 
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) as 
potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Based on the factors discussed above, I do not find that mitigation under AG ¶ 20 
has been established. Guideline F is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s national security eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i.:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.j.-1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
