 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-07517  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant claimed that six state tax liens entered against him in 2014 and a bank 
debt placed for collection in 2015 were not his valid debts, but offered insufficient proof 
to substantiate a basis to dispute their legitimacy. These delinquent debts total $19,706 
and remain unresolved. Financial security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 4, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 5.) On May 11, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on June 3, 2016, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 4.) On July 26, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on July 27, 2016, and received by him on August 3, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not provide any response to the FORM, file any objection to the 
FORM’s contents, or request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period he 
was afforded. The case was assigned to me on July 6, 2017. Items 1 through 8 are 
admitted in evidence. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of 
SEAD 4. I considered the 2006 adjudicative guidelines, as well as the SEAD 4 AG, in 
determining Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, but this decision is issued pursuant to the SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and married for the second time. He has two adult 
children and a 17-year-old daughter who lives with her mother. He has held his present 
position with a defense contractor since June 2013; and is seeking a security clearance 
in connection with that position. He is a high school graduate and has taken some 
college classes. He served in the Air Force from 1992 to 2012, and received an 
honorable discharge upon his retirement as a technical sergeant (E-6). He held a 
security clearance while on active duty, but it was suspended in May 2005 due to 
financial issues. (Item 5; Item 8.)  
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR with some explanations. (Item 
4.) SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f allege six tax liens, totaling $12,815, which were entered 
against Applicant in August 2014 by the state in which he has lived with his current 
spouse since January 2005. This period included his last eight years on active duty and 
has continued since he retired. Applicant claimed that these liens were based on the 
state’s unfounded claim that he owed state income tax while he was on active duty but 
claimed official residence in another state that does not have an income tax. Despite 
being advised in the FORM that he had not sufficiently demonstrated that these liens 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
were imposed for unpaid state income taxes during his active duty, or that such a claim 
by the state would not be legitimate under the facts of his case, he submitted no 
documented proof to substantiate the basis for his asserted dispute. He claimed to have 
retained a law firm in February 2016 to dispute the state’s tax claims, but offered 
nothing to indicate that any action had been taken toward resolution of the issue. The 
liens remain unresolved according to both record credit reports. (Item 4; Item 6; Item 7.)  
 
 Concerning the $6,891 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, which a bank placed for 
collection in February 2015, Applicant wrote in his June 2016 answer to the SOR: 
 
I have contacted [the bank] on this debit [sic] that I believe is not mine. 
They have been unable to send me any information about this debit [sic] 
and they have not returned my phone calls. I will continue to pursue this 
bank to resolve this issue.  
 
He submitted no evidence to corroborate this attempted communication. He did not 
explain how he requested that the bank send him information about the debt if “they” 
had not returned his phone calls. He made no apparent effort to contact the collection 
agency that is the current creditor holding the debt. He did not claim that this debt arose 
from circumstances beyond his control. It remains unresolved, and no documented 
proof to substantiate a basis to dispute its legitimacy was provided in response to either 
the SOR or FORM. (Item 4; Item 7.)  
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling. He provided no recent 
budget information from which to predict his future solvency or his ability to make any 
payments toward his delinquent debts. He offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning the level of responsibility his duties entail in his defense contractor work, or 
his track record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of 
security procedures there. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. (Item 
4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
 
 
4 
 
 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant incurred, and continues to owe according to the record evidence, more 
than $19,700 in delinquent state taxes and a bank debt placed for collection. He 
documented neither the ability nor willingness to satisfy these debts. These facts 
establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the 
burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent state tax and bank debts are substantial and ongoing. His 
failure to address these debts in a meaningful way creates ongoing concerns about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no reasonable basis to conclude 
that such problems will not continue or recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 
20(a).  
 
Applicant neither documented a reasonable basis to claim that his delinquent 
debts arose from circumstances beyond his control, nor showed that he acted 
responsibly under such circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He 
disputed that he owed these debts, but failed to provide either documented proof of a 
reasonable basis to dispute their legitimacy, or evidence of substantive actions to 
resolve them. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) was not demonstrated. 
 
Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, or budget information that 
would demonstrate either solvency going forward or an ability to repay his 
delinquencies. He provided insufficient evidence that these problems are being 
resolved, are under control, or that a good-faith effort toward resolution has been 
initiated. Neither arrangements with state tax authorities to pay the amounts owed, nor 
compliance with such arrangements was demonstrated. Accordingly, Applicant failed to 
establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c), 
20(d), or 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $19,700 in 
delinquent state tax and bank debts, and provided no evidence that he has taken action 
to resolve them. He provided insufficient evidence to demonstrate rehabilitation or other 
permanent behavioral changes. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress 
remains undiminished, and recurrence was not shown to be unlikely.  
 
 Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
