 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02096 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $16,000 in delinquent debt over the past six years, 
most of which he has been unable or unwilling to repay. He failed to demonstrate a 
workable plan to resolve his financial issues, or progress toward implementing one. He 
falsified two answers on his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), and was arrested on criminal charges four times from 2013 through 2016. 
Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the testimony, 
pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On May 6, 2015, Applicant submitted an e-QIP for reinvestigation of his security 
clearance eligibility. On September 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
 
 
 
 
2 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 17, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on December 19, 2016. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 27, 2017, setting the hearing for May 15, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel requested to amend the SOR by adding paragraph 3, which 
contained five allegations (¶¶ 3.a through 3.e) under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). 
Applicant had no objection to the amendment, and the request was granted. 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 into evidence, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but offered no documents 
into evidence during the hearing. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open 
until June 5, 2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 23, 2017. Applicant submitted documentary exhibits on 
May 24, and June 1, 2017, which were marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, and 
admitted without objection.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is employed as a quality insurance inspector by a Federal contractor, 
and is applying to continue his security clearance in connection with that work. The 
SOR alleged that Applicant owed 12 delinquent debts, totaling $16,112; deliberately 
falsified material facts in response to two questions on his 2015 e-QIP; and was 
charged with six criminal offenses after being arrested four times from 2013 through 
2016. Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with some explanations. (Answer; 
Tr. 22-25.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in the findings below.  
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He is a high school graduate, is married for the second 
time, and has three children. He has no previous military or Federal government 
service, but has been continuously employed since at least January 2005. (GE 1; Tr. 6, 
39-40.)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant admitted that he owed all 12 of the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. These debts ranged from $83 to $7,698 and totaled $16,112. They became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2016. Six of the debts were for less than $200. Their 
existence is confirmed by the record credit reports. On May 23, and 24, 2017, after his 
hearing, Applicant repaid four of these debts (alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.g), which 
totaled $786. This reduced his total outstanding delinquent debt to $15,326. Applicant 
offered no evidence of circumstances beyond his control that led to any of these debts. 
He has not undergone any financial or credit counseling despite having repeatedly said 
in his Answer, concerning each alleged debt, “I am working with credit consolidations to 
get this worked out.” (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; AE A; AE B; Tr. 40-57.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he falsified material facts on his e-QIP by answering, 
“No,” in response to questions about his police record and his financial delinquencies. 
He deliberately failed to disclose his 2013 arrest for Driving Under the Influence (DUI) in 
his ‘Section 22 - Police Record’ response, and the delinquencies discussed above in his 
‘Section 26 - Financial Record’ response. (Answer; GE 1; Tr. 58-59, 74-75.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested on February 2, 2013, and charged with DUI and Driving 
Without an Operator’s License. He was convicted of both offenses, and sentenced to 
180 days in jail (suspended). His operator license was suspended for 15 months and he 
was ordered to attend substance abuse classes. On or about November 14, 2015, 
Applicant was arrested for Domestic Violence Assault – 4th Degree after a neighbor 
called police to respond to a loud argument that Applicant had with his wife late at night. 
She picked him up from jail the next morning, and declined to press charges so no 
prosecution took place. On November 3, 2016, Applicant was arrested again for Assault 
– 4th Degree and Malicious Mischief – 3rd Degree when he broke a window while again 
arguing with his wife. He was convicted of both charges and sentenced to serve a 
maximum of 364 days in jail. This was suspended and he was placed on probation for 
one year, which he continues to serve. He was also required to attend weekly domestic 
violence and parenting classes and a No Contact/Protection Order was issued against 
him. On November 7, 2016, he was arrested for violating the No Contact/Protection 
Order. He was convicted of this offense and sentenced to a maximum of 30 days in jail, 
of which he served 20 days. (GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; Tr. 22-25, 67-74.) 
 
 Applicant provided no budget information from which to predict his future 
solvency, or his ability to make payments toward his delinquent debts. He offered no 
evidence to support findings concerning the level of responsibility his duties entail in his 
defense contractor work, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive 
information and observation of security procedures. No extrinsic evidence of good 
character, judgment, responsibility or rehabilitation was submitted. His testimony, 
however, was forthright and credible. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
 
 
 
 
4 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant incurred 12 delinquent debts, totaling more than $16,000, over the past 
six years. He resolved four of those debts after his hearing. However, more than 
$15,000 in delinquent debt remains, for which he demonstrated neither progress toward 
resolution nor a basis for dispute. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the 
resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
 
 
 
6 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant continues to owe more than $15,000 to numerous creditors for debts 
incurred while he has been continuously employed over the past six years. Applicant 
belatedly resolved four of the smaller SOR-alleged debts, but demonstrated no effort to 
address any of the remaining delinquencies. He did not demonstrate a legitimate basis 
to dispute his responsibility for any of these debts. Accordingly, Applicant failed to 
establish sufficient mitigation of security concerns arising from his financial 
irresponsibility under any of these conditions.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant is an experienced individual who has previously applied for and been 
granted a security clearance. He admitted his deliberate omission, concealment, and 
falsification of relevant facts concerning his delinquent debts and his criminal record on 
his 2015 e-QIP. This evidence establishes significant security concerns under AG ¶ 
16(a).  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s potentially disqualifying personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant did not provide, and the record does not otherwise contain, evidence 
that would support mitigation under any of the foregoing conditions.  
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 contains five disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns 
and may be disqualifying. Two of those conditions were established, as discussed 
below: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant’s criminal conduct in 2013, 2015, and 2016 involved a DUI, Domestic 
Violence Assaults, and Violating a No Contact/Protection Order. Charges were dropped 
for the 2015 incident at his wife’s request, but all of the underlying conduct, to which he 
admitted, casts doubt on his judgment and trustworthiness. Security concerns under this 
guideline were raised by this evidence.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 32 contains four conditions that could mitigate criminal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s crimes were committed over the past four years, and the most recent 
three offenses of which he was convicted took place two months after the issuance of 
his original SOR. He admitted their commission, and failed to demonstrate sufficient 
evidence of rehabilitation, maturity, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Mitigation of the 
criminal conduct concerns was not established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
 
 
9 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his decisions that led to substantial debt he has been unable or 
unwilling to repay. He continues to owe more than $15,000 in delinquent debt that he 
accumulated over the past six years and either could not, or chose not to, repay. His 
criminal conduct and falsifications on his e-QIP were intentional and recent. There is 
insufficient evidence of rehabilitation or a track record of compliance with financial, 
security-related, or legal obligations. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress 
remains substantial. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s 
trustworthiness, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for financial 
considerations, personal conduct, or criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
