 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-02639 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant refuted the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct.1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
                                                          
1 On July 2017, the SOR was amended and changed the date in ¶ 2.a from November 14, 2015 to June 
21, 2012. It also amended the date in SOR ¶ 2.b from February 21, 2014 to June 21, 2012. Applicant did 
not object and signed the amendment on July 24, 2017.  
 
2 
 
 
DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are 
effective for decisions issued after that date.2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another judge on March 16, 2017, 
who scheduled the hearing for May 9, 2017, which was canceled because Applicant was 
sick. It was rescheduled for May 30, 2017, and was again canceled because Applicant 
was sick. It was rescheduled for July 7, 2017, and Applicant requested a change of venue 
because he had moved. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 21, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on September 20, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant objected to GE 5 and 6 as to their relevance. His 
objection was overruled, and the Government’s exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. There were no 
objections to the exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. The record was held 
open until October 18, 2017, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He 
provided documents that were marked AE D through F, which were admitted without 
objection, and the record closed.3 DOHA received the hearing transcript on September 
28, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h. He denied 
the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, 2.a and 2.b. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He was married from 1989 to 1991. There were no 
children from the marriage. He has an adult child from a previous relationship. He holds 
a bachelor’s degree and two master’s degrees earned in 2001. Applicant served on active 
duty as an officer in the military from 1987 to 1999. He served in the reserves from 2004 
until he retired in 2015 in the paygrade of O-5. He is not yet eligible to receive retirement 
pay.4  
 
 After leaving active duty in 1999, Applicant worked for a defense contractor until 
2001, when he left to start his own consulting business. He worked for defense 
contractors from April 2002 to April 2009. He worked as an independent contractor from 
April 2009 to November 2012. He testified that from December 2012 until December 
2015, he was unable to find full-time work and worked part-time teaching college courses. 
He then worked from January 2016 until May 2016 when he became ill and had to leave 
his job for medical reasons. He presently receives Veteran’s Affairs disability and 
                                                          
2 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
3 Hearing Exhibit I is Government Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
4 Tr. 15, 19-28. 
 
3 
 
 
unemployment benefits. His family is also providing financial support. He testified that he 
was living in one state and was looking for work from May 2016 to June 2017 when he 
moved to another state to be closer to family, due to his medical issues.5  
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by Applicant’s admissions, testimony, 
and credit reports from July 2012, July 2016, March 2017, and September 2017.6  
 
 Applicant denied owing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($4,930-charged off). The credit card 
debt became delinquent in approximately 2013. He stated that he made arrangements 
with the creditor to pay a reduced amount in three equal payments. He was unable to 
make the third payment because his unemployment check was late. The creditor refused 
to accept the late payment. He stated in his SOR answer, “At which time, I informed them 
that of all my creditors they would be the last one I would pay if at all.” He testified that he 
has monitored his credit report and the status of this debt has not changed. He has not 
made any other payments. He did not provide documentary evidence of payments or his 
settlement agreement. The debt is unresolved.7  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($2,120) and 1.d ($1,922) are charged-off credit card 
accounts that became delinquent in approximately 2014 and 2015 respectively. Applicant 
admitted that he owes these debts and stated in his SOR answer that he contacted the 
creditors and advised them he was unemployed. He intended to pay the debts when he 
is employed. He testified that he has received notices from the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b that 
the debt has been sold to a collection agency. He will reengage his contact with this 
creditor once he is employed. The debts remain unpaid.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($2,075) is a charged-off account that was incurred in 2014. 
Applicant explained in his SOR answer that this was an overpayment from a tuition 
assistance program. He indicated that an error was made by the school he was attending 
regarding his enrollment status. He attempted to resolve it, but the government creditor 
garnished his disability payments for one month and then stopped. He intended to resolve 
the remainder owed once he is employed, or the government entity may continue to 
garnish his disability payments. At his hearing, Applicant did not provide evidence that 
payments were made or the current balance owed. The debt remains unresolved.9  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,250) is a cell phone debt that became delinquent in 
2014. He unsuccessfully disputed the charges with the creditor. He admitted he owed the 
                                                          
5 Tr. 28-38. 
 
6 SOR Answer; GE 2, 3, 4; AE A, B, D, E, F.  
 
7 Tr. 39-41.  
 
8 Tr. 42-43, 47. 
 
9 Tr. 43-47. 
 
 
4 
 
 
debt and intends to resolve it when he is employed.10 Applicant denied the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.f ($1,250) owed to a different cell phone carrier because he had made arrangements 
and paid the debt. He provided evidence to show the debt was resolved in November 
2016.11  
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file his 2009, 2010, and 2011 federal 
income tax returns as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. In his SOR answer he stated:  
 
I admit that during my voluntary participation in the non-constitutional 
federal income tax reporting program, as acknowledged by congress, I filed 
late returns for the tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011. No reason except 
procrastination and I filed them when it was convenant (sic) for me. No 
attempt at evasion. No federal laws were broken.  
 
In his SOR response to ¶ 1.h, which alleged he failed to timely file his 2009, 2010, 
and 2011 state income tax returns Applicant said, “I admit I filed late [name] state returns 
for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011. No reason except procrastination and I filed them 
when it was convenant (sic) for me. No attempt at evasion.” 
 
 Applicant testified that he had no excuse for failing to timely file his federal and 
state tax returns. He stated he believe he subsequently filed his 2009, 2010, and 2011 
federal and state tax returns. He believed he owed taxes for those years. When asked if 
he had filed his 2012 through 2016 tax returns, he did not think they were filed because 
he was unemployed and did not earn enough. He did not provide documentary evidence 
to show the delinquent federal tax returns for 2009, 2010, and 2011 are filed. He provided 
a document from the IRS in his post-hearing submission. It reflects that he does not owe 
a balance for his 2013 federal taxes. It also shows his 2013 federal income taxes were 
not filed timely. No other information was provided to show Applicant filed his 2009, 2010, 
and 2011 federal income tax returns. He testified that he did not think he paid taxes owed 
for these years, but would check.12  
 
 Applicant provided a document from the tax authority for the state where he 
previously had lived as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. The date of the document is May 10, 2017. 
It shows Applicant owes unpaid state taxes and provided explanation codes next to each 
tax year. The amounts owed include penalties and interest: for 2009-$701 (failure to file 
a return by due date and failure to file a return); 2010-$11,353 (failure to file a return by 
due date, underpayment of estimated taxes, and failure to file a return); for 2012-$7,276 
(failure to file a return by the due date); and for 2013-$1,630 (failure to file a return by the 
                                                          
10 Tr. 47-48. 
 
11 Tr.48; AE A.  
 
12 Tr. 49-62; AE E. I will not consider any derogatory information regarding other tax years that may not 
have been timely filed or paid for disqualifying purposes. I may consider the information when making a 
credibility determination, in the application of mitigation, and when analyzing the whole person.  
 
5 
 
 
due date, failure to file a return). Applicant testified that his wages were garnished in 2013 
and 2014 to pay state tax liens.13 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR answer, he stated the following: 
 
At this time, there are no further arrangements to make, as any funds I 
happen to come across go towards maintaining a residence and to 
subsistence. Once I am gainfully employed, which I anticipate will be very 
soon after resolution of this ongoing frivolous security clearance 
investigation, I plan to make arrangements to clear up any outstanding 
debts.14 
 
 Applicant testified that he intends to pay his debts. His health is improving, but he 
does not know if he will be able to work becasue he is still under a doctor’s care. He 
explained that he was frustrated that he first applied for a security clearance in 2012 and 
he repeatedly was asked the same questions. He believed that his financial issues were 
trivial in that there were only about $4,000 of debts and not significant to raise security 
issues. He credibly testified that he did not believe the process was frivolous, but he was 
just expressing frustration.15 
 
 In June 2012 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). Section 
22 inquired about his police record and it specifically told him to disclose information 
regardless of whether the record was sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the 
court record, or the charge was dismissed. The questions requested he disclose if in the 
past seven years he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court in 
a criminal proceeding (excluding traffic infractions where the fine was less than $300 and 
did not include alcohol or drugs.) It directed him to report if in the past seven years he 
had been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law 
enforcement official; if he had been charged, convicted, or sentenced to a crime in any 
court; and if he had been or was currently on probation or parole; or if he was currently 
on trial or awaiting trial on criminal charges? Applicant answered “no” to all of the 
questions and failed to disclose he has arrested for failing to appear in court in May 2008 
for a hearing related to a driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) charge.  
 
 Applicant also answered “no” on his June 2012 SCA to questions under Section 
22, which stated “other than those offenses already listed, have you EVER had the 
                                                          
13 Tr. 62-72; AE B, F. As previously stated, I will not consider any derogatory information for disqualifying 
purposes, but may consider it as noted above. AE B is a September 2017 credit report that reflects a state 
tax lien for $20, 229 was filed in May 2017, and is unpaid. It reflects a state tax lien was filed in September 
2011 for $2,206 that remains unpaid. It reflects a state tax lien filed in April 2011 for $1,789 and was paid 
in April 2013. It reflects a state tax lien filed in February 2010 for $1,950 and was paid in August 2012.  
 
14 SOR answer. 
 
15 Tr. 79-91. It appears issues regarding Applicant’s finances and tax returns were initially raised by his 
military department in 2012. There was a gap in processing his security clearance because he was not 
sponsored by an employer for approximately three years.   
 
6 
 
 
following happened to you? Have you EVER been charged with an offense involving 
alcohol or drugs? Applicant did not disclose he was arrested for DUI in March 2008 and 
pled nolo contendere to the offense in September 2008.  
 
 Applicant denied he deliberately falsified information on his SCA. He explained in 
his SOR answer the following: 
 
I had been informed that when something gets expunged from your record, 
you can answer no to any questions about it no matter who is doing the 
asking. So when asked the question in e-QIP, I answered no to any question 
about it. There may have been some confusion on my part as to what had 
actually been expunged and what wasn’t, as it was all one court case, there 
may have been multiple charges. Even though I believe I wasn’t required 
to, I did however, voluntarily divulged ALL of this information to the 
investigators that I spoke to in person about this. Please check their notes. 
At any rate, I plan to follow up with the court to ensure that all charges 
associated with this one case in question are properly expunged. And when 
asked in the future, I plan to answer no to any question concerning this, 
which I believe is my right to do so.16 
 
Applicant testified that it was not his intention to answer the questions untruthfully. 
He believed he was entitled not to disclose the information on his SCA and when he was 
asked about it by the government investigator, he disclosed the information. He believed 
that the failure to appear charge was included with the DUI and both were expunged. I 
found Applicant’s explanation credible and believe he did not intentionally falsify his SCA. 
He retracted his previous statement and testified that when asked in the future on a SCA 
about his prior arrest, he would disclose it even though it was expunged.17  
 
Applicant’s two sisters testified on his behalf. One sister also provided a written 
statement. They described him as trustworthy, responsible, moral, and ethical. He has 
proudly served in the military and has been an example to family and friends whom he 
has counseled about the importance of education, career goals, and integrity. Due to 
unemployment and health problems he has been unable to maintain a normal standard 
of living and his finances have suffered. They believe that he is not a threat to national 
security.18  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
16 SOR Answer.  
 
17 Tr. 73-79, 91-94. 
 
18 Tr. 96-102; AE C. 
 
7 
 
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
 
8 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts from at least 2013, which he has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. He failed to timely file his 2009, 2010, and 2011 federal and 
state income tax returns. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
9 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unresolved. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show he has filed his delinquent federal or state income tax returns 
for years 2009, 2010, and 2011. His explanation for his failure to file his tax returns was 
that he procrastinated and did them when it was convenient to him. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that his behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s failure to timely file 
his tax returns casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment, which were 
beyond his control. He attributed his failure to timely file his federal and state income tax 
returns to procrastination and indicated he would file them when it was convenient. This 
was within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must show that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not provided documented proof 
that he has filed his delinquent federal income tax returns. The tax document from the 
state that Applicant provided, reflects for tax years 2009 and 2010, he failed to file a 
return. There is insufficient evidence to determine that Applicant has acted responsibly 
with regard to timely filing his federal and state tax returns for the years alleged in the 
SOR. Applicant provided evidence that he paid one debt, but at this time he does not 
have the resources to pay the other alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f. AG ¶ 20(d) only applies to this debt. The 
remaining debts alleged in the SOR have not been resolved. Applicant indicated he is 
unable to pay these debts due to unemployment and health reasons. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude his federal and state tax returns have been filed, 
something that is within his control. There is no evidence that he has received financial 
counseling and the evidence does not show that his financial problems are under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a because the creditor would not accept a 
late payment on a settlement agreement. He denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c indicating it 
was an error and being paid through garnishment. He did not provide documentary 
evidence to support the basis of his disputes or evidence of actions he may have taken 
to resolve the issues. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
I have considered all of the evidence and conclude that Applicant did not 
deliberately falsify his SCA when he failed to disclose his DUI and failure to appear 
arrests. Although the language of the SCA indicated that he should disclose information 
even if it was expunged, I believe he erroneously believed at that time he did not have to 
disclose the information. I also believe his testimony that he thought that both charges 
were expunged. Applicant refuted the personal conduct allegations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
11 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He holds three college degrees, including two masters. 
He retired as an O-5 reserve officer in the military. Applicant has delinquent debts that 
are unresolved. He attributed them to periods of unemployment. At this time he is unable 
to pay his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for multiple 
years. His explanation was because he procrastinated, and it was not convenient to do 
so. He admitted he did not have a reasonable excuse. He had an opportunity to show 
that the delinquent returns have been filed, but did not. Documents he provided show that 
he owes state tax liens that are not paid. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. August 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 19 
 
Applicant’s history of non-compliance with a fundamental legal obligation to timely 
file federal and state tax returns raises serious concerns. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence in mitigation regarding his finances. I concluded that he did not deliberately 
falsify his SCA. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. He refuted the security concerns raised under Guideline E, 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
                                                          
19 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
12 
 
 
  Subparagraph   1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
