 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 16-01065 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented insufficient information to establish that she is financially 
responsible and that her financial problems have been resolved or are under control. 
The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 7, 2013. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 5, 
2016, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant 
answered the SOR on July 21, 2016, with some comments, and requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
September 1, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on September 20, 2016. She was 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
her unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator 
from February 10, 2016. (FORM, Item 4) Applicant was informed she could object to the 
summary of her interview, and it would not be admitted or considered by me, or that she 
could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. Applicant was informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise 
any objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence 
would be considered by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM and waived any 
objections. I admitted the FORM’s proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g. She denied 
SOR ¶ 1.h, claiming that she had paid the account. Her admissions to the SOR 
allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school in 1997, and completed some college courses between 2011 and 2012, but 
did not earn a degree. She has never married, but she lived with a cohabitant between 
2005 and 2015. She has four children, ages 21, 17, 11, and 7.  
 
Applicant’s employment history shows numerous periods of unemployment, part-
time employment, and short periods of full-time employment between 2003 and 2013. A 
federal contractor hired Applicant in January 2013. She has been working for her 
current employer and clearance sponsor since then. Her longest prior period of full-time 
employment was between April 2009 and February 2011. She resigned from that job 
after testing positive for marijuana in a urinalysis.  
 
In her response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of her March 2013 SCA, 
Applicant disclosed that she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in March 2013. 
She was discharged of all dischargeable debts in June 2013 (approximately $43,000).  
 
A government background investigator interviewed Applicant under oath in 
February 2016. During the interview, Applicant discussed most of the SOR debts. 
Additionally, she indicated she had federal student loans in deferment, totaling about 
$11,679, which she would start to repay in monthly installments of $125 in December 
2016. While discussing her numerous traffic offenses, Applicant volunteered that in an 
oversight, she forgot to disclose in the 2013 SCA that in 2006 she was charged with 
issuing two or more bad checks within 90 days, a felony. She appeared in court, repaid 
the bad checks, and the charge was dismissed.  
 
Applicant also volunteered that in June 2014, her supervisor confronted her for 
using the company credit card for about 20 personal purchases (SOR ¶ 1.f). She was 
 
3 
 
 
told never to do it again, and she has not. Applicant claimed coworkers told her the 
company did not mind her making personal charges on the company credit card as long 
as she repaid the bill on time. She further claimed she was never told it would be a 
violation of the company credit card policies for her to use it for personal charges. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant explained she had a car involuntarily 
repossessed in March 2013. This debt was apparently discharged through the Chapter 
7 bankruptcy. Applicant volunteered that she then purchased another car. The account 
became two months delinquent in about January 2015. She unsuccessfully attempted to 
lower the payments, voluntarily surrendered the car, and acquired the deficiency 
balance of $7,070. As of her June 2016 interview, Applicant had made no payments on 
this account. She stated to the investigator that she intended to repay the debt as soon 
as possible. She submitted no evidence of any payments made since she purchased 
the car. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, Applicant explained to the investigator that she 
intended to repay these debts as soon as possible. She submitted no evidence of any 
payments made.  
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.e, Applicant told the investigator she believed the debt was 
discharged through bankruptcy. In fact, the creditor is not listed in the bankruptcy 
documents, the account was opened after the bankruptcy filing (Item 5), and Applicant 
admitted the debt. She submitted no evidence of any payments made. 
 
Applicant told the investigator she paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g in June 
2015; however, she presented no evidence of payment. She claimed she took the loan 
to improve her credit and was unable to keep up with the payments. She submitted no 
evidence of any payments made to repay this debt. 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed she paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h. In February 2016, she told the investigator that the creditor had obtained a monthly 
garnishment of wages for $101, which was supposed to start in the near future. She 
presented no evidence of any payments made.  
 
During her February 2016 interview, Applicant indicated her financial problems 
resulted, in part, from her lack of organization and inability to keep up with her bills and 
payments. She attributed this to the way she was raised and her immaturity. She used 
multiple credit cards, made minimum payments, and often skipped paying one to pay 
the others. She also noted her periods of unemployment, underemployment, and short 
periods of full-time employment, but with low-paying jobs. In 2012-2013, she realized 
she could no longer make her payments and filed for bankruptcy protection. 
 
In her interview, Applicant was confronted with the delinquent debts she acquired 
after the bankruptcy discharge. She explained she separated from her long-term 
cohabitant in 2015, and went from a two-person family income to a one-person income. 
Thus, she had difficulty meeting her family living expenses and debts. As of February 
 
4 
 
 
2016, Applicant’s monthly net pay was $2,685, and after paying her monthly living 
expenses and debts she had a positive balance of $466. During her interview, Applicant 
repeatedly reiterated her intention to pay all her delinquent debts because she would 
like to purchase a home in the near future. 
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM and presented no evidence about her 
current financial situation. It is not clear whether her income is sufficient to pay for her 
family’s living expenses and debts, or whether her financial problems are resolved or 
under control. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
The case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
 
5 
 
 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant either has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the file record. AG ¶ 19 
provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; ”(b) unwillingness to satisfy 
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The record established the three disqualifying conditions, requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
problems are ongoing and recent. Her evidence is insufficient to show that her financial 
problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment, underemployment, and the separation 
from her cohabitant likely contributed to or aggravated her poor financial situation. 
However, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that she was financially 
responsible under the circumstances. She admitted to her financial irresponsibility in the 
handling of her credit before she filed for bankruptcy protection, and her unauthorized 
use of a company credit card. Notwithstanding, her bankruptcy discharge, Applicant has 
subsequently acquired new delinquent debt. She presented little evidence of efforts to 
resolve these newer debts. She presented no documentary evidence of any payments 
made, contacts with creditors, or payment agreements established after her 2013 
bankruptcy discharge, or after she was confronted with her additional delinquent debts 
during her 2016 interview, in her SOR answer, or in response to the FORM.  
 
 Considering the period during which the debts have been delinquent, the number 
of delinquent debts, the amount of debt involved, and that she has been employed since 
January 2013, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence of good-faith efforts to 
resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
 Even if I was to consider Applicant’s evidence as sufficient to establish that 
circumstances beyond her control prevented her from paying the debts, she failed to 
present sufficient information to show she was financially responsible. Additionally, the 
record is not clear about Applicant’s current financial situation and whether her income 
is sufficient to pay for her family’s living expenses and current debts. The evidence fails 
to show that Applicant’s financial problems are resolved or under control. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. In sum, Applicant presented insufficient 
information to establish that she is financially responsible and that her financial 
problems have been resolved or are under control. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:      Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
