 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02850 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documented evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 4, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 12, 2017, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1 through 4. Applicant received the FORM on January 25, 
2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and did not object to 
the Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the 
pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 5 are admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. On October 5, 2017, I e-mailed 
the parties and re-opened the record to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional information and documentation. Applicant responded the same day, and again 
on October 18, 2017. He submitted two narrative updates and two reference letters, which 
were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, and admitted without objection. 
On October 19, 2017, having reviewed Applicant’s submissions, I reopened the record 
until October 30, 2017 to allow Applicant additional opportunity to submit relevant financial 
documentation. Applicant indicated that he intended to respond, but did not do so. (HE I-
III). The record closed on October 30, 2017.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs are effective June 8, 2017 for all 
decisions after that date, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the 
SOR.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not affect my 
decision in this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. I have incorporated 
his admission and subsequent explanations into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. After graduating from high school in 2003, Applicant 
served honorably in the United States Air Force from December 2003 to November 2014. 
Since then, he has been employed in the defense industry. He has held a security 
clearance since 2004. He has worked for his current employer since November 2015. He 
has never married and has no children, but has a fiancée. Applicant has also been 
attending college full-time. (Items 2, 3; AE A, AE B) 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in December 2015, in 
connection with his employment. His background investigation included a January 2016 
credit report and a February 2016 background interview. (Items 2, 3, 4). Applicant’s 
background investigation revealed several delinquent debts, three of which were alleged 
in the SOR.  
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
 
3 
 
 
The largest debt is SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant’s mortgage. Applicant purchased a home 
in May 2014, in his final months in the Air Force. He financed the purchase with a 
Veterans’ Administration (VA) loan. As of January 2016, the mortgage was in foreclosure, 
with $13,165 past due and a total loan balance of $214,514. (Items 1, 3, 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($10,806) is the amount due in collection for an automobile that was 
repossessed. SOR ¶ 1.c ($37) is a small account in collection to a credit union. The 
accounts are all shown as past due on Applicant’s January 2016 credit report. (Item 4).  
 
 Applicant did not disclose any delinquent debts on his SCA, though he discussed 
them in his February 2016 background interview. (Items 2, 3) He explained that he fell 
behind on these debts after leaving the Air Force following a down-sizing. As a result, his 
monthly income decreased by about $400. (Item 3 at 4) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the repossession, but denied the 
other two debts. He provided no explanations and no documentation of their current 
status. He provided updated information when I reopened the record, in October 2017. 
He explained that he earned $15,000 less in annual income in the defense industry than 
he had earned in the Air Force. This led him to fall behind on his mortgage, and his car 
was repossessed. He stated that he was advised by friends that he could “rebuild” from 
the repossession but losing his home would be a “detrimental blow.” He explained that 
he and his fiancée successfully renegotiated their mortgage (¶ 1.b) at a better rate, and 
are now current. He believed the small $37 debt (¶ 1.c) was leftover interest from an old 
loan that was repaid years ago. (AE A, AE B)  
 
Applicant did not, however, provide any documentation to support his assertions. 
This, despite having been given additional opportunity to do so. (HE III) He submitted no 
documentation to establish that his mortgage was now current. He provided no 
documentation regarding the status of his repossessed auto account, or of his efforts to 
verify that he no longer owed a debt on it. He provided no proof even that the $37 credit 
union debt was paid. Applicant provided no other details or documents about his current 
financial situation, such as his monthly income and expenses, or his assets. Beyond his 
own updated statement, Applicant submitted only two recommendation letters from 
current supervisors, both of whom attested to his financial stability, the excellence of his 
work, and the responsible performance of his duties safeguarding classified information. 
(AE A - AE D) 
 
Policies 
 
 As the Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, it is well 
established that no one has a right to a security clearance.2  Further, “the clearly 
                                                          
2 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  
 
 
4 
 
 
consistent standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”3 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
                                                          
3 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained 
by known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may 
result from criminal activity, including espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.4 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns:  ¶¶ 19(a) “inability 
to satisfy debts” and (c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations” are applicable, 
given the record evidence of Applicant’s delinquent debts.  
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem, and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not establish that any of these mitigating conditions apply. Chiefly, 
this is because Applicant did not provide sufficient documentary evidence in support of 
his assertions, despite having had at least four opportunities to do so. He did not submit 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
documentation (or any explanation) with his answer to the SOR. He did not respond to 
the FORM. When I initially reopened the record, he submitted updated information and 
two reference letters, but no documents about his SOR debts. Finally, Applicant did not 
take advantage of the additional opportunity to provide relevant financial documentation 
when I opened the record a second time.  
 
 It is reasonable to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of specific debts.5 Applicant did not do so. He therefore did not meet his 
burden of establishing that his debts are being resolved, are under control, or are no 
longer delinquent, as shown by the Government’s evidence. He did not establish that he 
undertook good faith efforts to resolve his debts. Even if his debts occurred for reasons 
beyond his control, such as an unexpected decrease in income, he did not establish that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He did not establish that his debts are 
unlikely to recur, and no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
documentation that his debts are being resolved in a good-faith, responsible manner. 
Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010).  
 
 
7 
 
 
opportunity to observe his credibility based on demeanor.6 Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.                  
       
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23. 2013). 
