 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03684  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 17, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 28, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and C.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 28, 2017. He requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On May 24, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 5 Items, was 
received by Applicant on June 1, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 5 are admitted 
into evidence, and going forward are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 5.   
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Taiwan, which formally calls itself the Republic of China (China). Department Counsel 
provided a six page summary of the facts, supported by six Government documents 
pertaining to China.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  The documents provide elaboration and 
context for the summary.  Applicant had no objection.  I take administrative notice of the 
facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general 
knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and married.  He has a Master’s degree.  He holds the 
position of Software Engineer with a defense contractor. He has been working for a 
variety of commercial and government contractors since 1998.  He has never held a 
security clearance.  (Government Exhibit 3.)   
 
 Applicant was born and grew up in Taiwan.  From August 1993 to July 1995, 
Applicant served in the Taiwanese Coast Guard satisfying his mandatory military 
service.  In June 1997, at the age of 26, he moved to the United States.  In April 2014, 
he became a naturalized citizen of the United States and a dual citizen of both Taiwan 
and the U.S.  Applicant has been working for his current employer since 1998.  
(Government Exhibit 3.)       
 
 Applicant’s family that includes his father, mother, two brothers, a sister, as well 
as a mother and father-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan.  Applicant’s father is 
now 81 years old.   
 
 His father-in-law is 87 years old.  He retired from the Taiwanese Army at the age 
of 40.  He then worked as a member of the logistic staff for a food packaging company 
for 30 years.   
 
 Applicant maintains foreign contact with his relatives in Taiwan.  None of them 
know that he is under consideration for a security clearance.  Applicant traveled to 
Taiwan to visit family and friends in May 2010; January 2011; August 2013; and 
September 2013.  Applicant has received as much as $30,000 from his in-laws in 
Taiwan to purchase a house in the United States.  (Government Exhibit 4.)    
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was issued a Taiwanese passport on December 10, 2002.  This foreign 
passport expired on December 10, 2012.  Applicant traveled to France on January 2003 
and Taiwan in January 2011 using this passport.   In his security clearance application 
dated 2015, Applicant indicated that he possessed a Taiwanese passport that was valid 
until 2023.  In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he states that on November 29, 2016, he 
renounced his Taiwanese citizenship and provided photocopies showing that his 
Taiwanese passport has been cancelled.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Therefore, 
Applicant is no longer a Taiwanese citizen and no longer possesses a valid Taiwanese 
passport. 
  
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts about Taiwan, officially 
known as the Republic of China.  Its neighbor to the west is the People’s Republic of 
China, recognized as the sole legal government of China, which considers Taiwan to be 
part of the One China policy.  China is one of the world’s most active and persistent 
perpetrators of economic espionage, and it is predicted that their attempts to collect 
U.S. intelligence will continue at a high level and will represent a persistent, if not 
growing threat to U.S. economic security.  China’s intelligence services, as well as 
private companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens, or 
person with family ties to China, who can use their insider access to corporate networks 
to steal secrets using removable media and devices or e-mail.  China is using its cyber 
capabilities to support intelligence collection against the U.S. national diplomatic, 
economic, and defense industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense 
program. China very likely uses its intelligence services and employees or other illicit 
approaches that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security 
and export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials 
unobtainable through other means.  In 2015, numerous computer systems around the 
world, including those owned by the U.S. Government, continued to be targeted for 
intrusions, some of which appear to be attributable directly to China’s Government and 
military. These and past intrusions were focused on accessing networks and exfiltrating 
information. China uses state-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase 
the level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, 
development, and acquisition.  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
4 
 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
 
5 
 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
           Applicant’s family members are citizens and residents of Taiwan, part of China. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
6 
 
 Having considered the fact that Taiwan and China present a heightened risk to 
the national security of the U.S., the nature of the relationships with Applicant’s family in 
China may pose a security risk.  There is insufficient evidence in the record to show one 
way or the other if he has a strong connection with his family in China, or the country of 
China for that matter.  The record does not address the frequency of his contact with his 
family in Taiwan.  Other than his father-in-law, the record does not show whether any of 
his family in Taiwan is associated with the Taiwanese or Chinese government.  
Applicant may have only limited and casual contact with his extended family in 
Taiwan/China, but the record is not clear.  There may be something that could 
potentially create a conflict of interest.  Applicant resides with his spouse, who is also 
from Taiwan.  Applicant came to the U.S. in 1997, and states that he has loyalty to the 
U.S. He has established his life here, but it is not clear that all of his assets are here.  
Information developed during the investigation revealed that a large currency 
transaction occurred on May 23, 2002, which was placed in an American bank from 
Taiwan that resulted in $30,000 in cash.  Applicant states that these monies were 
received from his mother and father-in-law in Taiwan.  Applicant stated that he used this 
money to help buy his house in the United States.  Based upon this history, there are 
many questions left unanswered.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), has 
not been established. 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States.  Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it.  By itself: the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment.   The same is true for a U.S. citizen’s exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and nay action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. None are applicable in this case.  Under the new directive, possession of a 
foreign passport is not sufficient to meet the Guideline C criteria.  
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I 
considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign 
citizenship that is in conflict with the U.S. national security interests. 
  
 
7 
 
Applicant has renounced his Taiwanese citizenship and has cancelled his 
Taiwanese passport.  Accordingly, Guideline C – the Foreign Preference security 
concern is found in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
There is no compelling evidence showing that Applicant’s ties to his immediate 
family and parents in-law, permanent citizens and residents of Taiwan, do not pose a 
heightened risk of foreign influence.  It is noted that Taiwan, as part of China, continues 
to act as one of the most active, aggressive and capable collectors of intelligence 
targeting the U.S.  There is insufficient information in this record to prove that 
Applicant’s connections in Taiwan do not pose a risk.  He has strong family ties, 
evidenced by the large number of family members who remain citizens and residents of 
Taiwan, with whom he continues to travel to visit and maintain a relationship.  There is 
no evidence in the record that he has any family besides his spouse who resides in the 
U.S.  Without sufficient evidence to prove otherwise, Applicant may be subject to foreign 
influence that could cause him to make decisions that are against the national interests.     
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with many questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence security concern.  The 
Foreign Preference security concern has been mitigated.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
