 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03322 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant underwent a period of financial difficulties caused by unemployment and 
divorce. Resulting security concerns were fully mitigated. Based upon evaluation of the 
testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On June 11, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86). 
On December 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 5, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
 
 
 
2 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on April 27, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on May 15, 2017, setting the hearing for June 26, 2017. On that date, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified, 
and offered Exhibits (AE) A through F into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection.1 I left the record open until July 31, 2017, to permit possible submission of 
additional evidence. No additional exhibits were submitted. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 5, 2017.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative guidelines 
that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility determinations issued 
on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered 
the previous AG guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. This decision is issued pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all 16 SOR allegations, which included 15 delinquent debts. 
Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and divorced since 2012. She had been married for 12 
years, and separated for some of them. She has two children from the marriage, ages 13 
and 16. They live with her and she receives child support. She enlisted in the Army in 
1998 and served until 2002, when she left service with an honorable discharge as an 
specialist E-4. She deployed for seven months in 1999. She received an Army 
commendation medal while deployed. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2010. She has 
been working for defense contractors since 2002 and her current employer since 2015. 
She has held a security since 1998. (Tr. 19-22, 27.) 
 
 In February 2009, DOHA issued a SOR to Applicant alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
SOR alleged 13 delinquent debts that totaled $36,000, and Applicant’s failure to disclose 
delinquent accounts in her May 2008 SCA. After a hearing the administrative judge 
concluded that she mitigated the concerns raised under both guidelines. The 
administrative judge concluded that she sufficiently resolved or was resolving the debts 
and demonstrated that she did not intentionally fail to disclose delinquent debts. The 
Decision pointed out that her financial problems were caused by insufficient income, 
unemployment, separation from her spouse, and his failure to pay child support. (GE 5.)  
 
                                            
1Department Counsel offered Hearing Exhibit 1, as demonstrative evidence. It is a summary of the 
Government’s Exhibits. Applicant had no objection. (Tr. 14.)   
 
 
 
 
3 
 In December 2016, DoD CAF filed its second SOR. It alleged 15 delinquent debts 
that totaled $20,195. Two debts were duplicates; hence, the SOR alleged 13 delinquent 
debts totaling $16,987. None of the debts were alleged in the 2009 SOR. Applicant 
explained that these delinquent debts arose after her husband moved in with her and their 
children in 2010, having been separated since 2006. He irresponsibly used her credit 
cards and she subsequently became responsible for paying them. She also provided 
support for her elderly grandmother and autistic aunt from 2015 to 2016, another 
contributing factor to her financial problems. (Tr. 24-26, 29-30; GE 5.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted her June 2015 SF 86 for reinvestigation, she disclosed 
every debt subsequently alleged in the 2016 SOR, except one. (GE 1.) The status of each 
debt is as follows:  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a ($888 delinquent on an automobile loan with a total balance of $20,872) 
This debt is current. Applicant stated that the balance is about $10,000 and she thinks it 
will be paid in another year. She makes monthly payments on the loan. (Answer; Tr. 37; 
AE C.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.h ($4,439, $4,325, and $731, respectively, are charged off 
credit cards owed to the same creditor) Applicant said this is her largest debt and she 
intends to pay it after she completes paying other debts, including her car loan. (Answer; 
Tr. 26, 37-39; GE 2.)  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.k, 1.m and 1.n ($1,986, $179, $2,013, and $110, respectively, are 
medical debts.) The debt in ¶ 1.m ($2,013) is a duplicate of the debt in ¶ 1.d ($1,986).  
She paid the $179 debt, and disputed the $110, which was her husband’s medical debt. 
It was subsequently deleted from her CBR. The $1,986 debt is owed to a dentist for her 
son’s braces. She said her ex-husband is responsible for part of the debt; she is willing 
to pay the bill if he does not help. (Answer; Tr. 26, 33-36; AE C.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.l ($1,195 and $1,115, respectively, are duplicate debts for a 
payday loan.) This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 41-42; AE C.) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,198 is a cable equipment debt) Applicant disputed it because she 
paid the debt. It was removed from her CBR. (Tr. 40-41; AE C.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g. ($763 is a credit card debt) It was paid prior to the issuance of the 
SOR. (Tr. 36; AE B.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i. ($634 is a credit card debt) Applicant disputed it because she paid it. 
(Tr. 41-42; AE C.) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.j. ($534 is a credit card debt) It is unresolved. (Tr. 42-43; AE C.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o. ($105 was debt owed to a retailor) It was paid in February 2017. (Tr. 
37; AE A.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 Applicant has six outstanding delinquent debts to resolve. (Tr. 43.) She accepted 
responsibility for those debts and recognized that her resumption of a relationship with 
her former husband caused her additional financial problems and jeopardized her 
employment. She emphasized that during and after the prior investigation in 2009, she 
resolved about $30,000 of debt. She credibly asserted that she is aware of her unresolved 
debts that total $12,000 and is capable of paying them. (Tr. 23-24, 48-49, 52.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. Her net monthly income is $5,586, which includes 
child support. Her expenses are $4,687, leaving additional money at the end of the month 
for other matters. (AE D.) Her student loans were paid in full in 2015. (Tr. 39; AE C.) She 
has not participated in financial or credit counseling but has discussed her situation with 
a credit recovery service. She decided she did not to engage the service because of their 
high fees. (Tr. 46.)  
 
 In addition to the above delinquent debts, the SOR alleged that in October 2006 
and November 2013, Applicant was charged with theft of property or service by bad 
check. In 2006, Applicant mistakenly wrote a check on an account that she had closed 
when she moved. In 2013 she wrote a check on her account that had been compromised. 
She disclosed these charges in her e-QIP. Both charges were dismissed. (Answer.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
 
 
 
5 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial difficulties starting before 2008, as documented 
in her 2008 SF 86. After resolving those debts, she began accumulating additional 
delinquent debts in 2010. She has been unable to fully satisfy or resolve those debts. 
 
 
 
 
6 
These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant began accruing delinquent debts after her husband moved in with her 
and her children in 2010, and he began to spend money irresponsibility, as he had in the 
past. Since their divorce in 2012, she no longer pays his living expenses or is responsible 
for his debts. In addition, she no longer supports her grandmother, who died in 2016. 
Based on those permanent changes in her personal life, there is evidence to establish 
some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), as a similar financial situation is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted, to a limited extent, from circumstances 
beyond her control. She was aware of her husband’s financial mismanagement, and 
could have prevented some of the resulting delinquencies, had she been more diligent in 
monitoring her finances after he moved in with her and their children. While commendably 
demonstrating love for her grandmother, she voluntarily assumed debts that she could 
not afford. There is insufficient evidence documenting that she acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies minimally. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that she participated in credit or financial 
counseling; however, she presented evidence that she has resolved some debts and is 
 
 
 
 
7 
resolving other debts, albeit as money permits. She established limited mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(c). She made a good-faith effort to pay debts, including her student loans, and 
is making payments on a car loan. She disputed other debts on the basis that she paid 
them. She established some mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(c). 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult and 
is accountable for the decisions that lead to her history of delinquent debts and the 
resulting security concerns raised in 2009 and 2016. A significant concern in this case is 
the fact that Applicant has been before this agency twice for the same underlying issues: 
delinquent debts some of which are attributable to her former husband. After her 2009 
security clearance hearing, she resolved $30,000 of alleged delinquent debts. In 2010, 
her husband returned home and subsequently began spending money irresponsibly and 
burdening her with additional debts. After living together two years, they divorced in 2012. 
Since then, she accumulated delinquent debts that she has slowing been resolving.  
 
In most instances, this second security clearance investigation would warrant a 
denial of one’s security clearance. However, based on Applicant’s candid testimony, the 
resolution of some debts, and the payment of her student loans in 2015, she has 
demonstrated sufficient evidence of rehabilitation to warrant the renewal of her clearance. 
I have no doubts that she will continue to make good-faith efforts to resolve the remaining 
$12,000 of delinquent debts and to establish a solid record of financial solvency. The 
potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress is minimal. Overall, the evidence has 
eliminated the formerly legitimate doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. She successfully met her burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guideline for financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
