 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00452 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Applicant’s wife], Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 31, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on July 6, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 23, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for September 19, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and called five witnesses, but he did not submit any 
documentary evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He submitted documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
 
2 
 
through D and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor since at least 1990. He seeks to retain 
a security clearance. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 1984. He is 
married with an adult child.1 
 
Applicant is focused on his job, often working seven days a week. He takes little 
or no vacation. He is described by his wife and co-workers as brilliant, but disorganized, 
with little interest or involvement in anything outside work. He is also described as 
trustworthy, reliable, and “extraordinarily honest.” His wife handles most of his non-
work-related responsibilities, including: “finances, investments, and taxes; major 
purchasing decisions re cars, computers, medical and dental coverage, home 
appliances, and home improvements; gifts, family social activities; shopping; and any 
other responsibilities.”2 
 
Applicant’s wife used to work for the U.S. Government, and she held a security 
clearance. She suffers from depression, and she has a hoarding disorder. She did not 
file their joint state and federal income returns for 2014, 2015, and 2016 when they were 
due, and she did not pay all the taxes owed.3 
 
Applicant and his wife retained a tax professional. They filed their state and 
federal tax returns for 2014 through 2016 in November 2017. Their returns indicated 
they owed the IRS $1,998 and their state $418 for 2014. They owed the IRS $426 and 
their state $229 for 2015. They paid the IRS $1,998 and $426, and the state $647 for 
the two years. Their 2016 returns indicated they were due a refund of $3,501 from the 
IRS and $1,503 from their state.4 
 
Applicant’s wife accepted responsibility for their failure to file the tax returns and 
pay taxes when due. She is receiving treatment for her issues. Applicant knows it is also 
his legal obligation to file his tax returns and pay his taxes on time, and that failure to do 
so in the future could cost him the job that he loves. They indicated that they will file all 
future returns when they are due.5 
 
  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22; GE 1.  
 
2 Tr. at 12, 21-25, 43-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A.  
 
3 Tr. at 13, 25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A.  
 
4 Tr. at 13, 26; AE A-C.  
 
5 Tr. at 25-29, 32, 35-42, 65-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, D.  
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant did not file his tax returns when they were due, and he did not pay his 
taxes. The evidence raised the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant is described by his wife and co-workers as brilliant, but disorganized, 
with little interest or involvement in anything outside work. That description is consistent 
with my observation. He is also described as trustworthy, reliable, and “extraordinarily 
honest.” His wife handles virtually all of his non-work decisions and tasks. That 
approach worked until her depression and hoarding disorder contributed to her failing to 
file their tax returns and pay their taxes. 
 
5 
 
Applicant and his wife realized they needed assistance, and they retained a tax 
professional. They filed their state and federal tax returns for 2014 through 2016 in 
November 2017. The paid the taxes due for 2014 and 2015, and they are due refunds 
for 2016, which will cover any additional amounts due for penalties and interest.  
 
Applicant knows it is his legal obligation to file his tax returns and pay his taxes, 
and that failure to do so in the future could cost him the job that he loves. They credibly 
stated that they will file all future returns when they are due. I am satisfied that 
Applicant’s finances are now in order and that his tax issues will not be repeated. AG ¶¶ 
20(d) and 20(g) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
