1 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 16-01934 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns generated by his delinquent debts and his failure to disclose them, as 
required, on his security clearance application. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The SOR explained why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
2 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 26, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations in 
Paragraph 1, except subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. He neither answered, nor 
denied the personal conduct allegation in Paragraph 2. I will construe his non-answer as a 
denial. 
 
Applicant requested a decision based on the written record instead of a hearing. On 
September 23, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). 
Applicant received the FORM on September 26, 2016, and was notified of his opportunity 
to file a response within 30 days of receipt. He did not respond. The case was assigned to 
me on July 1, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 4 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on March 18, 2015. Such reports are inadmissible without 
authenticating witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  Consequently, I have not considered this 
document in my disposition of this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 55-year-old married man with four adult children. He is a high school 
graduate who served four years in the U.S. Army from 1980 through his honorable 
discharge in 1984. (Item 3 at 12) He has spent the majority of his career working as a 
security guard. 
 
 The SOR alleges $43,152 of delinquent debt. He provided no explanation of how he 
incurred the admitted debts, nor any evidence that he has done anything to resolve them. 
Applicant denies five of the SOR debts, approximately $10,000 (subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 
1.f, 1.h, and 1.i). He provided no explanation substantiating the basis of the disputed debts. 
He did not disclose relevant information about his finances on his security clearance 
application, as required (subparagraph 2.a) 
 
 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
4 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
 Applicant’s SOR delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant provided no information detailing how he incurred these debts, nor any 
evidence of what he is doing to resolve them. As for the disputed debts, he provided no 
information substantiating the basis of the dispute, or detailing steps to resolve them.  
Under these circumstances, none of the mitigating conditions applies. I conclude Applicant 
has failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concern 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” Moreover, “of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful 
and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes.” (AG ¶ 
15) Applicant’s omission of relevant, material financial information from his 2015 security 
clearance application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
5 
 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. 
 
 Applicant provided no explanation for the omissions. Therefore, he has failed to 
meet his burden. AG ¶ 16(a) applies without mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the whole-person concept in my adjudication of this case and it does 
not warrant a favorable conclusion. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
