 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03850 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On January 25, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.1 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 2, 2017. In a sworn statement, dated 
February 8, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) on March 7, 2017, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period 
of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the 
Directive as well as the previous Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 15, 2017. Applicant’s response was due on April 14, 2017. 
Applicant took advantage of this opportunity, and some time before March 27, 2017, 
Applicant submitted his response, including several documents and a written statement, 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments nearly all of the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., and 1.e.) of 
the SOR. Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has served as an 
engineering technician since December 2015. He previously worked part-time as a 
plumbing worker (January 2009 until December 2015); full-time as a flooring installer 
(January 2012 until December 2015); as a co-owner of a plumbing company (January 
2007 until January 2009); and as a plumbing worker (January 2004 until January 2007). 
He received a General Equivalency Diploma (GED) in approximately 2011. Applicant has 
never served in the U.S. military. He has never been granted a security clearance. He 
has never been married.  
 
  
                                                          
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations2 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until early 2008, for until 
that time, he was making regular payments on his various accounts. Applicant’s finances 
became an issue in early 2008 when the economy started deteriorating and Applicant’s 
work slowed down. Because of a lack of business, Applicant and his partners had to shut 
down their plumbing company, and Applicant searched for hourly jobs. Nevertheless, 
some accounts became delinquent, one account was charged off, and two accounts went 
to judgment. There is also an allegation that a tax lien was filed against Applicant. In 
addition, Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for the tax years 2008 
and 2010.3 Although Applicant initially considered resolving his debts by filing for 
bankruptcy, he rejected that option. Instead, he chose to wait until he had acquired a 
stable job and accumulated sufficient funds to enable him to address his debts.4  
In addition to the one allegation regarding Applicant’s failure to timely file his 2008 
and 2010 federal income tax returns, the SOR identified four purportedly delinquent 
accounts that had been placed for collection, charged off, filed as judgments, or filed as 
a lien, as generally reflected by Applicant’s 2014 or 2016 credit reports. Those debts, 
totaling approximately $98,963, and their current status, according to the credit reports 
and other evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, are described as follows:  
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is an unspecified type of bank account with an unpaid balance 
that was placed for collection, and in May 2012, filed as a judgment against Applicant for 
$10,940. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account remains 
delinquent, but added that he believed the account had been written off, and he had not 
                                                          
2 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 5 (e-QIP, dated January 4, 2016); Item 9 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, 
dated January 29, 2014); Item 8 (Equifax Credit Report, dated October 28, 2016); Item 10 (Personal Subject Interviews, 
dated May 25, 2016, and September 14, 2016); Item 4 (Answer to the SOR, dated February 8, 2017). 
 
               3 The legal requirement to file a federal income tax return is based upon certain conditions, including an 
individual’s gross income and other enumerated conditions. Once it is determined that there is an obligation to so file, 
the following applies: 
 
Any person required under this title to pay any estimated tax or tax, or required by this title or by 
regulations made under authority thereof to make a return, keep any records, or supply any 
information, who willfully fails to pay such estimated tax or tax, make such return, keep such records, 
or supply such information, at the time or times required by law or regulations, shall, in addition to 
other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be 
fined not more than $25,000 ($100,000 in the case of a corporation), or imprisoned not more than 1 
year, or both, together with the costs of prosecution. In the case of any person with respect to whom 
there is a failure to pay any estimated tax, this section shall not apply to such person with respect to 
such failure if there is no addition to tax under section 6654 or 6655 with respect to such failure. In 
the case of a willful violation of any provision of section 6050I, the first sentence of this section shall 
be applied by substituting "felony" for "misdemeanor" and "5 years" for "1 year." 
  
26 U.S.C. § 7203, Willful failure to file return, supply information, or pay tax. 
 
4 It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future 
are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible 
manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 
1999)). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
received any communication from the creditor in over four years. In February 2017, 
Applicant entered into a repayment arrangement with the creditor under which he agreed 
to make a monthly payment of $20 until the entire balance is paid in full. He made an 
initial $100 payment on February 6, 2017; a second $100 payment on February 25, 2017; 
and a third $100 payment on March 25, 2017.5 The account is in the process of being 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is an unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance that 
was placed for collection, and in February 2012, filed as a default judgment against 
Applicant for $5,038.24 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account 
remains delinquent, but added that he believed the account had been written off, and he 
had not received any communication from the creditor in over four years. In February 
2017, Applicant contacted the collection agent, and he was referred to a particular law 
firm to set up a repayment arrangement. Under the repayment agreement, Applicant 
agreed to make a monthly payment of $100 until the entire balance is paid in full. He 
made an initial $100 payment on February 3, 2017; a second $100 payment on February 
25, 2017; and a third $100 payment on March 25, 2017.6 The account is in the process 
of being resolved. 
 (SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a federal tax lien in the amount of $81,840.84 that was filed 
in January 2011. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that the lien was his, and 
he pointed out that the taxpayer identified on the Notice of Federal Tax Lien (Applicant’s 
father) was not his name, and the Social Security Number was also not his number.7 
Applicant disputed the item with Experian, and following the processing of the dispute, 
the item was deleted from Applicant’s credit report.8 In his Response to the FORM, 
Applicant asked that argument by Department Counsel associated with the allegation be 
disregarded:9 
Applicant has submitted documentation from the court showing that there is 
a lien against his father for the amount alleged in the SOR for the tax years 
2003, 2004, and 2005. However, evidence of the lien against his father does 
                                                          
5 Item 4 (Letter, dated February 6, 2017); Item 4 (Check, dated February 6, 2017); Checks, various dates, 
attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
6 Item 4 (Check, dated February 3, 2017); Checks, various dates, attached to Applicant’s Response to the 
FORM. 
 
7 Item 4 (Notice of Federal Tax Lien, dated January 11, 2011), attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; 
Item 4, supra note 2, at 7. 
 
8 Item 4 (Dispute Letter, dated January 27, 2017), attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; Dispute Results, 
dated February 8, 2017, attached to Applicant’s response to the FORM. It should be noted that the January 2016 credit 
report upon which the SOR allegation was based, reflects variations of both Applicant’s name and his father’s name, 
but only Applicant’s Social Security Number under the Subject Information section. Neither the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator nor the DOD CAF obtained a copy of the original source document, choosing instead 
to rely only on the credit report to confirm the existence of the lien. 
 
9 FORM, at 6. 
 
5 
                                      
 
not necessarily negate the Government’s evidence that there is also a lien 
in the same amount against Applicant. 
Department Counsel’s argument is weak at best. As noted above, neither the OPM 
investigator nor the DOD CAF obtained a copy of the original source document, choosing 
instead to relay only on the credit report to confirm the existence of the lien. As correctly 
stated by Department Counsel, “the Government has the burden of proving only 
controverted facts.” In this instance, Applicant denied the allegation, and furnished 
evidence that the lien was not his, thereby returning the burden of proof back to the 
Government. Arguing that “evidence of the lien against his father does not necessarily 
negate the Government’s evidence that there is also a lien in the same amount against 
Applicant, is a rather meaningless declaration, for there is only disputed and ultimately 
discredited evidence of a lien against Applicant, and zero evidence of two separate liens. 
The overwhelming evidence regarding the lien is that Applicant has favorably resolved 
the issue. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a bank-issued credit card account with a $1,400 credit limit 
and unpaid and past-due balance of $1,145 that was placed for collection and charged 
off in May 2010. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account remains 
delinquent, but added that he had contacted the collection agent about setting up a 
repayment plan, but that he was advised that the account had been returned to the 
creditor. When he attempted to set up a repayment plan with the creditor, he was advised 
that the account was between departments, so no arrangements could be made. 
Repeated efforts to resolve the account have been unsuccessful, as the creditor has not 
engaged in any settlement discussions. Applicant did not submit any documentation to 
support his contentions. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for the 
tax years 2008 and 2010. During his OPM interview in September 2016, Applicant stated 
that if he had made income necessary to have filed a federal income tax return for the tax 
year 2008, he would have done so. He could not recall if he made any money during 
those two tax years. Applicant could not remember anything about the 2010 tax year. In 
his February 2017 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he did not file a federal 
income tax return for the tax year 2008. He indicated he was gathering all relevant 
information in order to do so within “the next few weeks.” As of his Response to the FORM 
in March 2017, Applicant had not submitted any documentation to support the filing of the 
delinquent income tax return. With respect to the 2010 federal income tax return, 
Applicant contended that due to the recession and a lack of work, he was not working at 
the time. He did not submit any documentation to support either his lack of income, or an 
indication that he was not required to file a federal income tax return for that year. The 
issue has not been resolved. 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. His last Earnings Statement for 2016 reflects gross income for 2016 of over 
$54,000. His net pay per two-week paycheck during the period September 16, 2016, until 
 
6 
                                      
 
December 15, 2016, fluctuated between $1,363 and $1,778. There is no evidence of a 
budget. There is no evidence of any financial counseling. Other than comments made by 
him, and credit scores of 749 and 758, Applicant offered no documentary evidence to 
indicate that his financial situation is now under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”10 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”11   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”12 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
                                                          
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
11 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
12 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.13  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”14  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”15 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. In addition, AG ¶ 19(f) may apply for “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required.” Applicant’s credit reports reflect four delinquent accounts, 
including a disputed federal tax lien, and he has admitted that three of the accounts are 
still delinquent. He failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for the tax years 2008 
and 2010. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”16 Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”17 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                                          
16 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s ongoing, 
unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of the 
Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-
01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
17 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” Under AG ¶ 20(g), it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has 
made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and 
is in compliance with those arrangements.” 
 AG ¶ 20(e) applies, and ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) minimally apply, but none of the 
remaining mitigating conditions apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s 
continuing financial difficulties since 2008 or before make it difficult to conclude that it 
occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it is “unlikely to recur.” Applicant 
noted some unspecified financial hardships during the difficult economic period in 2008 
and 2009. Applicant has been employed by his current employer since December 2015, 
and although he had previously intended to resolve his debts, he did nothing to do so 
between December 2015 and February 2017 – a week after the issuance of the SOR. 
Applicant claimed he was unaware that the accounts were still his responsibility because 
they had been written off and his creditors stopped sending him delinquency notices for 
over four years. Rather than addressing the three delinquent accounts, over a substantial 
period of time, Applicant simply took no action to resolve them. He finally commenced his 
repayment efforts in February 2017, and he has submitted documented proof to 
substantiate his efforts. 
Applicant successfully disputed the tax lien and provided documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute as well as actions taken to remove it from his credit 
report. Applicant has not been credited with filing his federal income tax returns for the 
tax years 2008 and 2010, for aside from comments regarding his income during those 
years, Applicant has not submitted any documentary evidence to reflect either that he has 
filed the returns or that he was not required to do so. He could have obtained some 
documentation from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), but he failed to do so. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct in furtherance of the plan may provide for the payment of 
such debts one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without further 
confirmed action, are insufficient. 
 
There is a substantial risk when one accepts, at face value, the contents of a credit 
report without obtaining original source documentation to verify entries. Credit bureaus 
collect information from a variety of sources, including public records and “other sources,” 
and it is these other unidentified sources that are the cause for concern. Likewise, when 
accounts are transferred, reassigned, sold, or merely churned, an individual’s credit 
history can look worse than it really is. In this particular instance, a credit report referred 
to a tax lien regarding an individual with the same middle initial and last name, but different 
first name and Social Security Number than Applicant. Likewise, when the information in 
 
10 
                                      
 
the credit report is refuted by documentation from the actual creditor, and the credit 
reporting company has failed to correct its entries in a timely manner, one can conclude 
that the information in the credit report – actually a summary or secondary evidence 
pertaining to an account – is less accurate, trustworthy, or reliable than the other evidence 
of record. 
 
There is little evidence of a timely good-faith effort to contact the creditors to 
resolve the accounts. Applicant admitted that he had not been in touch with several of his 
creditors for over four years.18 There is no evidence to support mitigation factors 
associated with the unfiled income tax returns. There is little substantiated evidence that 
the conditions that may have resulted in the financial issues were largely beyond 
Applicant=s control. There is no evidence of financial counseling or a budget. Applicant 
offered little evidence to indicate that his financial situation is now under control. Equally 
as important, there is no evidence that Applicant acted timely or responsibly under the 
circumstances, and that failure to do so continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.19 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.20   
                                                          
18 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
20 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
11 
                                      
 
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant has been 
employed full-time by his employer since December 2015. He substantiated his 
contentions that the federal tax lien was not filed against him, but rather was filed against 
someone else. He has finally, but belatedly, embarked on a good-faith effort to resolve 
three of his delinquent debts. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There are three debts that Applicant has admitted having. Two went to 
judgment and one was charged off. He made little effort to resolve them until he received 
the SOR. Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for 2008 and 2010. 
His lack of attention to, and lack of compliance with, the law regarding the timely filing of 
federal income tax returns, appear to be an unacceptable pattern of conduct. Considering 
the relative lack of evidence regarding his current finances, and the absence of character 
evidence regarding Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness, I am unable to 
reach a positive conclusion pertaining to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:21 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a poor track record of timely debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, avoiding the debts in his name, and failing to fulfill his promises to take 
timely corrective actions. Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
                                                          
 
21 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d. and 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
