1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 16-01333 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leonard L Casalino, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline K, handling protected 
information, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On November 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guidelines K, handling protected information, and E, personal 
conduct, explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 14, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting all of 
the allegations, and  requested a decision based on the written record instead of a hearing. 
 
2 
 
On November 9, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). 
Applicant received the FORM on April 15, 2017. He then retained an attorney and filed a 
response on May 11, 2017. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 3 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interviews conducted on October 21, 2015 and March 8, 2016. Such reports are typically 
inadmissible without authenticating witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  Applicant’s counsel, 
however, did not object to the inclusion of the interview summaries in the FORM, and he 
referenced them in his response. Consequently, I have incorporated the interview 
summaries into the record and have considered them in my disposition of the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 64-year-old married man.  He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1977 
and an information technology certificate in 1987. He has worked in the network 
administration field for various defense contractors for the past 25 years. During this time, 
he has held a security clearance. Since 1999, he has worked in the position of principal 
network administrator. (Item 1 at 36) 
 
 Applicant is highly respected on the job. In 2008, the division chief of the agency 
that Applicant supported wrote a letter of commendation to Applicant’s company, informing 
them that Applicant had “excelled far beyond rightful expectations for his position.” (Item 1 
at 8) In addition, he commended Applicant for the “continuous outstanding support” that he 
had been providing over the years. (Item 1 at 12) He particularly noted Applicant’s ability to 
exceed at a high level, performing under the “severe scrutiny” of the information technology 
security office and working promptly while navigating “the many stringent requirements due 
to perpetually growing information technology security rules and regulations.” (Item 1 at 12) 
In 2011, the division chief again contacted Applicant’s employer to complement his 
performance, noting that the division had “come to expect consistently excellent support 
from Applicant, but he had “exceeded even those high expectations.” (Item 1 at 14) During 
an office move, Applicant “ensured that the computing systems classified network . . . was 
up and operational, with full functionality, with minimal downtime . . . despite an unexpected 
reduction of time for installation and test from a planned 30 days to just seven.” (Item 1 at 
14)  
  
3 
 
 One Friday evening May 12, 2015, Applicant inadvertently placed four pages of 
information, printed from a classified printer, into his notebook and took them home over 
the weekend. (Item 3 at 4; Response at 4) He discovered this mistake when he prepared to 
do some work at home and opened the notebook. He then removed the papers and placed 
them into his laptop computer bag compartment. When Applicant returned to work on May 
15, 2016, he shredded the four pages, then e-mailed the agency’s information assurance 
officer. On May 19, 2015, he notified his supervisor and the agency division chief where he 
was assigned. (Response at 5; Item 3 at 4)  
 
 When Applicant contacted the agency division chief, he also disclosed a previous 
incident that occurred in 2014 when he was conducting a printer test to ensure that his 
work laptop was connected to the printer. When he was finished running the test, he 
accidentally left the printer connection test page, identifying that the printer was classified, 
in his laptop when he closed the laptop. Both classified and unclassified information could 
be received from this printer. (Item 3 at 5) Applicant did not realize what he had done until 
he took the laptop home and opened it. (Item 3 at 6) When he discovered the error, he 
immediately returned the test page to work and shredded it. (Item 3 at 6)  
 
 The agency division chief and the agency facility security officer (FSO) contacted 
Applicant and told him that any ensuing internal investigation would focus solely on the 
May 2015 incident. (Response at 4-5) Then, Applicant’s  FSO contacted him on May 27, 
2015 and instructed him to complete an online security clearance application. On June 1, 
2015, Applicant completed the form, as instructed. (Item 2) In response to Section 27, 
Question 1 “in the last seven years have you introduced, removed, or used hardware, 
software, or media in connection with any information technology system without 
authorization, when specifically prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulation or 
attempted any of the above?” he answered “yes,” and discussed the 2015 incident, but  
omitted the 2014 incident. 
 
 Applicant did not discuss the 2014 incident when an investigative agent interviewed 
him in October 2014. (Item 1 at 3) He thought he did not need to discuss the 2014 incident 
because the agency chief and the agency FSO had told him that any internal investigation 
would focus solely on the May 2015 incident. (Response at 4) During Applicant’s first 
investigative interview, he gave the agent the contact information of his supervisor and the 
company’s FSO. (Response at 6) In addition, after the first interview, he told his supervisor 
that the investigator would probably contact her. (Response at 6) 
 
 On June 18, 2015, Applicant received an e-mail from his company’s FSO who 
informed him that he was going to be verbally counseled for the 2015 incident and  
required to retake the company’s initial security briefing and information directives, together 
with a security refresher training. (Response at 5-6) He successfully completed the training. 
(Response at 10) 
  
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
  
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 Under this guideline, “deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and 
regulations for handling protected information - which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information - raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard 
such information, and is a serious security concern.” (AG ¶ 33) Applicant’s security 
violations in 2014 and 2015 trigger the application of AG ¶ 34(g), “any failure to comply with 
rules for the protection of classified information.” 
 
 The incidents that form the basis of the SOR were both unintentional. In addition, 
they are the only violations that Applicant has committed in the 25 years that he has held a 
security clearance. Historically, Applicant has been exceptional at balancing security 
consciousness with work performance, as noted in two commendation letters. Under these 
circumstances, AG ¶ 35(a), “so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has 
happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” applies. 
 
 After the 2015 security violation, Applicant received security awareness counseling 
and completed a remedial security awareness briefing. The first prong of AG ¶ 35(b), “the 
individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now 
demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities,” applies.2
  
 Security violations represent significant misconduct. As the Appeal Board noted, 
they “are one of the strongest possible reasons for denying or revoking access to classified 
information, as they raise serious questions about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information.” (ISCR Case No. 01-24358 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2004)). 
Nevertheless, the nature and seriousness of the security violations must still be weighed 
against the mitigating factors. Here, the negative ramifications of the security violations are 
outweighed by the infrequent nature of the conduct, the presence of rehabilitation, 
Applicant’s history of exceptional security consciousness, and his stellar work performance, 
rendering the likelihood of recurrence minimal. In sum, Applicant has mitigated the 
Guideline K security concern.    
 
 Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” Moreover, “of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful 
                                                 
2The second prong of AG ¶ 35(b) is not relevant because there is no record evidence that Applicant ever had  
  a negative attitude toward the discharge of his security responsibilities. 
6 
 
and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes.” (AG ¶ 
15) Applicant’s failure to disclose the 2014 security episode to the investigator who 
interviewed him in October 2015 raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information; or concealing or omitting information, concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national security 
eligibility determination, or other official government representative,” applies. Applicant self-
reported both security violations. He thought that he did not need to address the 2014 
incident because both the agency chief and the agency FSO had told him that any internal 
investigation would focus solely on the May 2015 incident. (Response at 4) Moreover, 
although he did not disclose the 2014 incident to the agent when asked about previous 
security violation, he gave the agent the contact information of his supervisor and the 
company’s FSO, and told his supervisor that the investigative agent would probably contact 
her. Under these circumstances, I conclude that Applicant did not intend to mislead the 
investigator, and that there are no personal conduct security concerns.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the whole-person factors in my analysis of the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, particularly when gauging Applicant’s credibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
