 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 16-02203 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
November 29, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 2, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Government Exhibit 1.) On October 6, 2016, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F 
(Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 12, and 
December 30, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 17, 2017. The case was 
assigned to me on January 24, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on February 23, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on April 11, 2017. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 
4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 19, 2017. The record was left open 
for the receipt of additional evidence. On May 12, 2017, Applicant Exhibit A was 
submitted, and received without objection. The record closed at that time. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 34, and has two children with his girlfriend. He has been employed 
by a defense contractor since February 2015 and seeks to retain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment. He served on active duty with the Navy from 2004 
through 2012, receiving an Honorable Discharge. He was underemployed from the time 
he left the Navy until he started work with his current employer. (Government Exhibit 1 
at Section 13A; Tr. 20-21.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph, with 
some explanations. The total amount of money Applicant allegedly owes on those debts 
is approximately $31,146. The existence and amount of the debts is supported by credit 
reports dated January 8, 2016; and January 17, 2017. (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.) 
The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
                                            
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing a credit union $17,277 for a past-due automobile 
loan. According to Applicant, this loan concerned a car of his that was a total loss after 
being stolen in 2014. Applicant stated that his insurance company was supposed to pay 
off the automobile. When asked what he had done to resolve this debt, Applicant stated 
that he had recently been in touch with the credit union, but not with the insurance 
company. After the hearing Applicant submitted a document from the insurance 
company showing that the claim was still in process as of May 12, 2017. This debt is not 
resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2; Tr. 21-24.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing the same credit union $9,485 for a past-due credit 
card account. Applicant had not made any payments on this debt for some years. After 
the hearing Applicant submitted a copy of a check for $125 that he submitted to this 
credit union concerning this debt, as well as 1.c, and 1.d, below. The check shows that 
the credit union applied $75 to this debt. This single payment is not sufficient to show 
that Applicant is resolving this debt. This debt is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 3; 
Tr. 24-26.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing the same credit union $2,007 for a past-due 
signature loan. Applicant had not made any payments on this debt for some years. After 
the hearing Applicant submitted a copy of a check for $125 that he submitted to this 
credit union concerning this debt, as well as 1.a, above and 1.d, below. The check 
shows that the credit union applied $25 to this debt. This single payment is not sufficient 
to show that Applicant is resolving this debt. This debt is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibit 
A at 3; Tr. 26-29.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing the same credit union $1,968 for a past-due credit 
card account. Applicant had not made any payments on this debt for some years. After 
the hearing Applicant submitted a copy of a check for $125 that he submitted to this 
credit union concerning this debt, as well as 1.b, and 1.c, above. The check shows that 
the credit union applied $25 to this debt. This single payment is not sufficient to show 
that Applicant is resolving this debt. This debt is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 3; 
Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $236 for a past-due telephone account. 
Applicant stated at the hearing that he had paid this debt off. However, Applicant Exhibit 
A at 4 shows that Applicant actually made a payment settling the account on May 4, 
2017, after the hearing. Applicant has paid this debt, albeit late. This allegation is found 
for Applicant. (Tr. 30-32.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $114 for a past-due electric bill. Applicant 
stated in his Answer and at the hearing that he had paid this debt off. Applicant was 
given an opportunity to support his averment with a bank statement or other 
documentation. He did not submit any supporting documentation. Based on the 
available information I find this debt is not resolved. (Tr. 32-34.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $59 for a past-due medical bill. Applicant 
stated in his Answer and at the hearing that he had paid this debt off. Applicant was 
given an opportunity to support his averment with a bank statement or other 
documentation. He did not submit any supporting documentation. Based on the 
available information I find this debt is not resolved. (Tr. 34-36.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has engaged in conduct that shows questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
Applicant denied both allegations under this paragraph. 
 
 2.a. Applicant filled out his e-QIP on December 2, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) 
Section 26 of the e-QIP concerns Applicant’s financial record. One of the subsections 
under that section is entitled, “Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts.” Applicant was 
asked whether, in the seven years preceding that date, he had defaulted on any type of 
loan; had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit 
card suspended, charged off or cancelled; and whether he had been 120 days 
delinquent on a debt, or whether he was currently 120 days delinquent on a debt. 
Applicant responded, “No,” to this question. This was a false response. Applicant had 
delinquent debts that were in collection, as set forth under Paragraph 1, above, which fit 
the question. 
 
 Applicant admitted this allegation in his Answer without elaboration. At the 
hearing Applicant stated, “I do not know why I answered no to these questions, because 
I should have answered yes.” He further denied intentionally falsifying his questionnaire 
concerning his debts. (Tr. 36-42.) 
 
 Government Exhibit 2 is a Report of Investigation of an interview of Applicant by 
an investigator with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on March 17, 2016. At 
page 4 of that exhibit the investigator noted the following, “Subject [Applicant] reported 
no to questions both on the case papers and during the interview regarding accounts in 
collections/charged-off.” He was then confronted with the existence of the debts set 
forth in the SOR. After a discussion of the debts the investigator also noted, “Subject 
reports that he has no reason why he did not list all of the above-noted debts.” Applicant 
stated at the hearing that he did not remember telling the investigator that he did not 
have any debts. (Tr. 38-42.) 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. He did not submit a budget, or 
other documentation concerning his ability to pay his debts, and his ability to avoid 
financial problems in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant=s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant, based on the available evidence, had six delinquent accounts that he 
could not resolve. Allegation 1.e was found for Applicant. The total amount of his 
indebtedness remains over $30,000. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence does not establish that any of the above mitigating conditions apply 
to Applicant. Applicant remains indebted to six creditors for upwards of $30,000. These 
debts have existed for several years. It appears that Applicant did little or nothing to 
resolve any of these debts until shortly before the hearing, or immediately after it. 
Applicant had about three years of underemployment after he left the Navy, but did not 
submit any information showing how that period of underemployment affected his 
finances, or what he has done since being employed in 2015 to rectify the situation. As 
stated, he submitted proof that he made one payment of $125 on three debts to the 
same credit union, which only reduced his debt to the credit union from $13,460 to 
$13,335. There is no basis for me to find that Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns of his financial situation. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his e-QIP, the following 
disqualifying condition could apply under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his e-QIP. When a falsification allegation 
is controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing 
alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.2  
 
 In this case, there is insufficient evidence in the record to prove Applicant had a 
specific intent to falsify his questionnaire. While Applicant has admitted his answers on 
the questionnaire about his past-due debts were false, he has consistently denied 
intentionally falsifying them. At the hearing, Applicant seemed genuinely puzzled by his 
false answer, freely admitting he should have said yes. Based on the available 
evidence, I cannot find that Applicant made an intentional false statement on his e-QIP. 
Paragraph 2 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial irresponsibility was 
recent, voluntary, and occurred when he was a mature adult. Rehabilitation was not 
demonstrated, nor was unlikelihood of recurrence. Overall, the record evidence as 
described above leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for national security eligibility. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
