1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 16-03215 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control, 
and he is working with a credit collection agency to rehabilitate his finances. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On January 19, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was 
unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance 
eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On February 18, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, denying the allegations, and 
requested a decision based on the written record instead of a hearing. On March 21, 2017, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the 
FORM on March 27, 2017, and filed a response on April 25, 2017. The case was assigned 
to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 5 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on December 16, 2015. Such reports are inadmissible without 
authenticating witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Consequently, I have not considered this 
document in my disposition of this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 58-year-old high school graduate with two adult children. He has 
been divorced since 2009. He is a Navy veteran, serving from 1979 to 1986, when he 
received an honorable discharge. He has been working for various federal contractors 
since leaving the military in 1986, and has maintained a security clearance since 1981. 
(Item 4 at 29) He has been working for his current employer as a technician since 2015. 
 
 The SOR alleges five debts, totaling approximately $60,000. Applicant’s finances 
first became strained when he and his wife divorced in 2009 and he assumed many of her 
debts. (Response at 1) His financial problems were exacerbated when he relocated after 
losing his job in 2012, and was subsequently unemployed for 14 months from May 2013 to 
September 2014. (Item 4 at 12) 
 
 Applicant retained a credit counseling agency to contest all of the alleged SOR 
delinquencies. With the help of the attorney for the collection agency, Applicant initiated an 
investigation of the disputed debts, and contacted the creditors. (Item 3 at 4) In March 
2016, the creditor for three of the alleged delinquent accounts (subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 
and 1.e) contacted Applicant and informed him that, under an agreement reached with the 
U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, it was no longer going to continue pursuing 
any delinquent debt claims against Applicant. (Response at 4)  
 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
 Applicant’s dispute of the remaining SOR debts (subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c) was 
unsuccessful. With the help of the credit counselor, Applicant developed a payment plan in 
April 2017 to satisfy them. Under the plan, Applicant pays $814 to the credit counseling 
agency in $407 payments deducted automatically from his bi-monthly pay. (Response at 
15) The initial account balance was $60,979, and included a debt that was not alleged in 
the SOR. The plan is projected to be satisfied in three and a half years. (Response at 16) 
Applicant’s net pay is $3,000 per month. (Response at 16) In addition, Applicant receives 
$408 per month in service-connected disability benefits. (Response at 17) 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the 
totality of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine 
adjudicative process factors in AG ¶ 2(d). The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
4 
 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which it the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were not caused by profligate spending. Instead, they 
were caused by a divorce in 2009, and exacerbated by a lengthy period of unemployment 
in 2012. Applicant contested all of the SOR debts, and retained a credit counseling agency 
to investigate them. While the investigation was pending, the creditor of the debts alleged 
in SOR subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e informed Applicant that it was no longer going to 
litigate any claim for the disputed debts. It is unknown from the record whether this decision 
5 
 
was prompted by the efforts of Applicant’s credit counselor, or whether the creditor was 
pressured to drop the claim by the U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, in an effort 
to avoid a potential class action lawsuit. Nevertheless, Applicant has provided documentary 
proof that he is not responsible for three contested SOR debts. AG ¶ 20(e) applies. 
 
 Applicant confirmed through the credit counseling agency that he owes the creditors 
of the remaining SOR debts that he had originally contested. Consequently, in April 2017, 
he developed a payment plan to satisfy them. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply.  
 
 Applicant’s credit counselor just finished helping him draft a debt payment plan in 
April 2017, three months after the SOR’s issuance. Consequently, Applicant had not yet 
developed a payment track record as of the close of the record evidence. Consequently, 
AG ¶20(d) is only partially applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Applicant is a disabled veteran who fell on hard times after a divorce and a job loss. 
He has since recovered, and has been steadily employed for the past two years. He has 
actively worked to resolve his financial difficulties, retaining a credit agency to challenge 
their authenticity, and developing a payment plan for the satisfaction of the confirmed 
delinquent debts. Under these circumstances, I conclude that the mitigating surrounding 
circumstances, together with the efforts at rehabilitation, render the vulnerability to coercion 
minimal, and outweigh the negative security inference generated by the relatively recent 
amount of time that has elapsed since Applicant entered the payment plan. Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concern. In reaching this conclusion, I also 
considered the length of time that has held a clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
