 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02782 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed to his 
financial problems and that he was financially responsible under the circumstances. He 
disclosed his financial problems in his 2016 security clearance application (SCA). His 
financial problems are being resolved. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on February 11, 2016. After reviewing it and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 27, 2016, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on December 5, 2016, and requested a decision based on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing.  
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
January 4, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on January 23, 2017. He was allowed 
30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case 
 
2 
 
 
was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. I admitted and considered all the FORM’s 
proffered evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation (SOR ¶ 1.a), with explanations. His 
admission to the SOR is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. After a thorough review 
of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He married in 1982 
and divorced in 2006. He married his current wife in 2010. He has four children of these 
marriages, ages 33, 29, 18 (stepson), and 5.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school and enlisted in the U.S. Army. He served 
on active duty between July 1981 and February 2004, when he was honorably retired 
after 23 years of service. While in the service, Applicant possessed a top-secret 
clearance that has been continued to present.  
 
Applicant’s employment history after his retirement is somewhat sketchy. He 
provided no information about any employment between 2004 and 2006. He indicated 
that he has worked part-time for a federal contractor since February 2006, and that his 
current employer, a federal contractor, hired him for a full-time position in September 
2015. He was self-employed between January 2012 and March 2013.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his February 2016 SCA his financial problems, which at 
the time included two delinquent credit card accounts, one of which is alleged in the 
SOR. The other credit card account was apparently paid or resolved, and it is not 
alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant explained in the 2016 SCA, and in his response to the SOR, that his 
financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control. He was ill during 
part of 2014, was unable to work, and lived from his retirement income and savings. 
Additionally, in 2014, he provided financial assistance to his mother by paying some of 
her medical bills. He also paid for some of his father-in-law’s medical and burial 
expenses. Applicant used his credit cards to pay for his family travel, lodging, and burial 
expenses for his father-in-law. In 2015, he paid for his mother’s eye surgery. All these 
factors placed a financial hardship on him. He used his credit cards to pay for these 
extraordinary expenses and he did not have sufficient earnings to pay for his living 
expenses and debts. Thus, some of his debts became delinquent.  
 
Applicant started working full-time for his current employer in September 2015 
and immediately started addressing his debts. He stated in his SOR answer that in a 
short period he was able to bring his accounts current, with the exception of the account 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s statement is corroborated by the 2016 credit report 
included in the FORM (Item 4). It shows Applicant had a total of 31 trade lines 
(accounts). Only 9 of these accounts had a running balance, and only the account 
 
3 
 
 
alleged in the SOR was delinquent. The remaining 30 accounts were noted a “pays 
account as agreed.” 
 
Applicant stated that this was the first time he ever had any financial problems. 
He promised to avoid any financial problems in the future. He also promised to continue 
paying his legal debts and to resolve his financial problems. The file has evidence 
showing that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and his actions so far 
showed a good-faith effort to meet and fulfill his financial obligations.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
4 
 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. Between 
2014 and 2015, Applicant acquired debts beyond his financial means, one of which 
remains delinquent. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; 
and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the 
disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and recent. However, his financial 
problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, circumstances beyond his 
control – his personal illness prevented him from working, the terminal illness and death 
of his father-in-law (increased travel, lodging, and medical expenses), and he provided 
financial assistance to his mother. Considering the evidence as a whole, it shows that 
his financial problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur.  
 
 The analysis of whether Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances is 
not difficult considering the evidence. The credit report shows that as of September 
2016, Applicant had 31 accounts. Only 9 of these accounts had a running balance – 8 
were current, and only the account alleged in the SOR was delinquent. The remaining 
30 accounts were noted a “pays account as agreed.” Considering the record as a 
whole, the evidence shows that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Whatever financial problems he had, he made efforts to resolve his financial problems, 
and paid his delinquent financial obligations, except for the one alleged in the SOR. 
There is no evidence of any additional delinquent accounts since he filed his 2016 SCA. 
 
 In sum, Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish that circumstances beyond 
his control caused the financial hardship and prevented him from paying some debts. 
He acted responsibly under the circumstances. He disclosed his financial problems in 
his 2016 SCA. He is paying his delinquent debts and his current financial situation is 
improving. I find that there are clear indications that his financial problem is being 
resolved or is under control. Given additional time, Applicant will pay his remaining 
delinquent account. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He retired from the 
Army after 23 years of honorable service. During his service, he held a clearance that 
has been continued to present. Circumstances beyond his control contributed to or 
aggravated his financial problems. The record evidence is sufficient to establish that he 
was financially responsible under the circumstances and that his financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. The financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
7 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
