 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03915 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines G and J. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol 
consumption) and J (criminal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 29, 2017, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on April 28, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on May 5, 2017. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. The Government’s 
documents identified as Items 1 through 9 are admitted in evidence without objection. 
Other than his Answer to the SOR, admitted into evidence as Item 2, Applicant failed to 
submit any additional documentation. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.f, and neither admitted nor 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. He is 46 years old. He obtained a high-school 
diploma in June 1989. He has worked as an engineering technician for a defense 
contractor since June 2008. He was granted a DOD security clearance in May 2009. As 
of October 2016, he had never been married and did not have any children.2   
 
 Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times in excess and to the point of 
intoxication, from 2004 to June 2016. He was arrested in April 2004 and charged with 
driving while intoxicated (DWI). He was arrested in March 2006 and charged with 
misdemeanor assault and battery, which stemmed from an alcohol-related incident.  
The charges were subsequently dismissed after he paid a $66 fine. He was arrested in 
July 2009 for misdemeanor drunk in public. He paid a $97 fine.3  
 
 In October 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with misdemeanor driving 
under the influence (DUI), reckless driving, and failure to stop at the scene of an 
accident. He consumed an unrecalled number of jaeger bombs while at a sports bar 
with friends, watching an afternoon football game. He drove home after the game, but 
realized he was hungry when he arrived at his home. He then drove to a café to buy 
food, and then to a grocery store to buy soda and ice cream. Upon arriving back home, 
the police were waiting for him. They administered a field sobriety test, and Applicant 
registered a .18% blood alcohol content (BAC). An eyewitness observed Applicant hit a 
house, and the police determined Applicant’s address after they found his front license 
plate in the house’s yard. Applicant did not recall the specifics of this incident, but he 
pieced the details together from the information told to him by his sister who lived with 
him, eyewitness testimony, and police records.4   
 
 In January 2015, he was convicted of DUI 1st offense, BAC .15-.20%. He was 
sentenced to 30 days in jail with 25 days suspended; he was placed on unsupervised 
                                                          
2 Response to the SOR; Item 4.  
 
3 Items 5, 6, 8.  
 
4 Items 4-9.  
 
 
3 
 
probation for two years; his driver’s license was restricted for six months to one year, 
and he was administered an ignition interlock breathalyzer for the first six months. He 
was also ordered to enter into an alcohol safety action program for 12 months and fined 
$481. The remaining charges were nolle prossed. As of July 2016, he had complied 
with the court’s sentence. He self-reported this incident to his supervisor. His employer 
did not permit him to drive the company car while he was in the alcohol safety action 
program. This incident is common knowledge among his family, friends, and 
coworkers.5  
 
 In June 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI 2nd offense within a 
5-year period, with a BAC between .15-.20%; reckless driving for endangering life, limb, 
or property; and hit and run for failure to stop. Applicant consumed ¼ of a gallon bottle 
of rum and decided to drive to a restaurant because he was hungry. While waiting for 
his food, he drank an unrecalled number of jaeger bombs at the restaurant’s bar. He 
then drove to another restaurant for seafood, and consumed an unrecalled number of 
jaeger bombs there. While driving back home, he missed his turn, bumped a car, and 
kept driving. At a red light intersection, he decided he would not wait for the light to turn 
green, so he drove his car, and bumped and pushed another car out of the way. 
Applicant also did not recall the specifics of this incident, but he pieced the details 
together from eyewitness testimony and police records.6  
 
 As of July 2016, Applicant was awaiting his trial date. The court placed him on 
probation and restricted his driver’s license for 60 days. He was to abstain from alcohol 
while awaiting trial. He stated that this incident is also common knowledge among his 
family, friends, and coworkers.7 
 
 Applicant admitted that he drank heavily before his October 2014 DUI conviction.   
He abstained from alcohol between February 2015 and February 2016, while he was 
enrolled in the court-ordered alcohol safety action program. After the program, he did 
not want to resume his same level of alcohol consumption. However, he began drinking 
again in March 2016. He did so while at home, watching television by himself. Initially, 
he drank two to three beers a couple of nights weekly. Then, he consumed six to eight 
beers daily after work. In April 2016, he began consuming hard liquor to achieve the 
same effect because he had grown tired of drinking beer. From April to June 2016, he 
drank a liter bottle of hard liquor every three to four days.8  
 
 He stated that his alcohol consumption does not interfere with his work, he has 
never consumed alcohol at work, and his employer has never referred him to alcohol 
counseling. He concluded that jaeger bombs makes him have memory blackouts, and 
he needs to find a hobby to fill his time instead of drinking. He has not tried to abstain 
                                                          
5 Items 4-9.  
 
6 Item 9. 
 
7 Item 9. 
 
8 Item 9. 
 
4 
 
from drinking on his own. While he did not recall if he was ever diagnosed with alcohol 
dependence, he considered that he might be a binge drinker which sometimes gets out 
of control.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
                                                          
9 Item 9. 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 22. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 Applicant has a pattern of excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related 
incidents.  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides the following conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s pattern of excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related 
incidents did not happen under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and 
they continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. His 
DUI conviction in January 2015, and his arrest and charge for DWI 2nd in June 2016, are 
recent and not mitigated by the passage of time. While he acknowledged that he might 
be a binge drinker that sometimes gets out of control, he has not demonstrated a clear 
pattern of modified consumption, and he failed to provide evidence of actions he has 
taken to overcome his problem. Though he successfully completed the court-ordered 
alcohol safety action program in connection with his January 2015 DUI conviction, he 
subsequently resumed consuming alcohol. He was drinking a liter bottle of hard liquor 
every three to four days as of June 2016, and he was also arrested and charged with 
DWI 2nd in June 2016. AG ¶¶ 23(a) through 23(d) are not applicable. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant has a pattern of alcohol-related incidents from 2004 through June 
2016. He was recently convicted of DUI in January 2015, and arrested and charged with 
DWI 2nd in June 2016. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(b) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
 
7 
 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s pattern of excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related 
incidents did not happen under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and 
they continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. His 
DUI conviction in January 2015, and his arrest and charge for DWI 2nd in June 2016, are 
recent and not mitigated by the passage of time. While he acknowledged that he might 
be a binge drinker that sometimes gets out of control, he failed to provide evidence of 
successful rehabilitation. Though he successfully completed the court-ordered alcohol 
safety action program in connection with his January 2015 DUI conviction, he 
subsequently resumed consuming alcohol. He was drinking a liter bottle of hard liquor 
every three to four days as of June 2016, and he was also arrested and charged with 
DWI 2nd in June 2016. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and J in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
