 
1 
 
                                                                  
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-03072 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 12, 2015. On 
October 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006 (2006 AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. On February 21, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case and, on February 22, 2017, sent a complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 
through 6. She was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on March 
24, 2017, and timely submitted her response, to which the Government did not object. 
Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into 
 
2 
 
evidence. I admitted into evidence the attachments to Applicant’s SOR answer, as 
Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through C, and her FORM response and the attachments 
thereto, as AX D through J. The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2017. 
 
On October 16, 2017, I emailed the parties to reopen the record in order to afford 
Applicant the opportunity to provide an updated FORM response. That email has been 
marked as Appellate Exhibit (APX) I. Applicant timely submitted a response to which 
she attached additional evidence that I admitted into evidence, without objection, as AX 
K through AX N. The Government submitted additional evidence, without objection, that 
I admitted as GE A, and Applicant’s reply thereto as AX 0. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the FORM was completed. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 56, divorced her husband of 22 years in 2004. She has one adult 
child. She received her high school diploma in 1975 and took college courses in 2011 
and 2012. She served honorably in the U.S. Air Force between 1979 and 1982. She has 
been steadily employed since April 2015. She has held a DOD security clearance since 
2001.  
 
Applicant lived and worked overseas in a combat zone from January 2005 
through May 2014, when she was involuntarily laid off. While unemployed from May 
2014 through April 2015, she worked part time from August 2014 through April 2015.4 
Applicant returned to live and work overseas in a non-combat zone in April 2015 and, 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2), her SCA (Item 3), and the summary of her July 2015 security clearance 
interview (Item 5). I considered that Item 5 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. 
However, Applicant was informed by Department Counsel that she was entitled to make corrections, 
additions, deletions, and updates to Item 5. Applicant was also informed that she was entitled to object to 
consideration of Item 5 on the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant did neither in her response 
to the FORM. Therefore, I conclude that she has waived any objection to Item 5. 
 
4 See also Item 5 at 1. 
 
 
3 
 
on a date not specified in the record sometime prior to April 2017, returned to live and 
work overseas in a combat zone, where she remains through present.5 
 
The SOR alleged delinquent federal tax debt for tax years 2008 through 2012 
totaling $45,000 (SOR ¶ 1.h), a $2,641 state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.g), five accounts in 
collection or charged-off status totaling $17,154 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e), and a 
charged-off account of an unspecified amount (SOR ¶ 1.f). 
 
Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e and 
1.h. She denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g, which were resolved prior the 
issuance of the SOR.6  
 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan in September 2016 to resolve the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and made regular payments pursuant to that plan from October 
2016 through January 2017, when it was resolved.7 
 
While Applicant has not yet resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, sometime 
after the issuance of the SOR, she initiated contact with the original creditor and two 
collection agencies to obtain information on how to do so. In November 2017, she 
asserted that she planned to send a check to either the original creditor or one of the 
collection companies on a date not specified in the record.8 
 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan in September 2016 to resolve the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, and made regular payments pursuant to that plan from October 
2016 through January 2017, when it was resolved.9 
 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan in September 2016 to resolve the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and paid at least one payment pursuant to that plan to reduce the 
balance to $2,486 as of November 2016.10 It was resolved in January 2017.11  
 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan prior to the issuance of the SOR to resolve 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, and made regular payments for six months pursuant to 
that plan through August 2016, when it was resolved.12 
                                                          
5 See also AX D and K. 
 
6 AX B, C, and J. 
 
7 See also AX E; GE A. 
 
8 See also AX K, N, and O. 
 
9 See also AX K; GE A. 
 
10 AE A. 
 
11 AX H and K; GE A. 
 
12 See also AX I and K; GE A. 
 
 
4 
 
Without stating any details or providing corroborating documentary evidence, 
Applicant suggested for the first time in her SOR answer that a third party may have 
made unauthorized charges on the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d.13 
However, as noted above, Applicant resolved these accounts, apparently without 
initiating any type of formal dispute with the creditors. 
 
The amount of delinquent federal taxes alleged in the SOR (¶ 1.h / $45,000) is 
based on an estimate that Applicant self-reported in her June 2015 SCA. She attributed 
it to “back taxes” owed while deployed overseas. She claimed to have set up a payment 
agreement with the IRS (on a date not specified in the record) prior to completing the 
SCA, but had “put off” making payments due to “moving often” and lack of a “stable 
income.”14 
 
During her July 2015 security clearance interview, Applicant acknowledged that 
her federal tax debt involved tax years 2008 through 2012, and admitted that she had 
not only been late paying her federal taxes, but also late filing her federal tax returns. 
She confirmed that the amount owed was $45,000 or more. She claimed that she was 
paying $250 per month to satisfy the debt, and anticipated that it would take her several 
years to fully resolve it. Applicant admitted that she largely did not pay attention to her 
federal taxes while overseas, particularly between 2005 and 2014 while she deployed to 
a combat zone and did not have regular access to the internet or telephone. She 
committed to resolving the federal tax debt in the coming years.15  
 
In her November 2016 SOR answer, Applicant admitted that she owed 
delinquent federal taxes for tax years 2008 through 2012, but claimed she “did [not] 
realize” that the federal debt was $45,000. She also claimed she had set up an 
electronic payment account to pay it. By April 2017, the account had been set up and 
Applicant had made at least one attempt to contact the IRS to find out details about 
what she owed.16 
 
Applicant hired an attorney in July 2017 to assist her with resolving the federal 
tax debt, due to what she suspected were errors in the balance owed, including filing 
status, deductions, and fees for penalties and interest. As of October 2017, her attorney 
was still working to resolve it. The IRS notified Applicant that she also owed 
approximately $2,500 for tax year 2016.17 Applicant did not provide any corroborating 
documentary evidence of any payments she made to the IRS either before or after the 
issuance of the SOR, or of her efforts to resolve the suspected errors.  
 
                                                          
13 See also AX O. 
 
14 GE 3 at 38. 
 
15 Item 5 at 6. 
 
16 AX D.  
 
17 AX K. 
 
 
5 
 
While the record is silent as to Applicant’s income history, in her SCA, she 
attributed her non-tax debts to an unspecified period when she accepted a 52% 
reduction in pay in order to keep a job during one of her re-deployments; her 
unexpected May 2014 layoff and the underemployment and unemployment period that 
followed, during which time she did not receive unemployment compensation; an 
unspecified amount of money she spent to fix damage to her home in 2014; and an 
unspecified amount of money she spent for an unspecified period of time supporting her 
son who had also been laid off.18 Her credit reports corroborate that the non-tax debts 
were incurred during the period between 2014 and 2015.19 During her 2015 interview, 
she acknowledged that not living within her means or paying attention to her finances 
for several years also contributed to her financial indebtedness.20 
 
Applicant averred that with the extra income she will earn working in a combat 
zone, she will have the means to repay her federal taxes and otherwise maintain her 
finances. She has not had any financial counseling.21 Applicant’s recent credit report 
reveals that she is managing her current finances responsibly, and has not incurred any 
new delinquent debts.22 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”24 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”25 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
                                                          
18 Item 3 at 40; Item 5 at 3. 
 
19 Items 4 and 6. 
 
20 Item 5 at 6. 
 
21 Item 5 at 9. 
 
22 See also AX D, K and O; GE A. 
 
23 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24 Egan at 527.S 
 
25 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
6 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”26 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.27 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”28 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.29 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.30 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.31 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”32 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”33 
                                                          
26 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
27 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
29 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
30 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
31 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
32 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
33 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.34  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and her credit reports establish three disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file or 
fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
                                                          
34 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully established. Given the circumstances under which she 
incurred the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and the reasonable steps that she has taken to 
pay or otherwise resolve it, I conclude that her actions with respect to resolving her 
other non-tax debts demonstrate that she will follow through with paying it as promised. 
However, there remains substantial, unresolved federal tax debt (SOR ¶ 1.h).  
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Despite the lack of details in the record, I find 
that Applicant’s 2014 layoff, and the unexpected expenses associated with her home 
repairs and son’s layoff were circumstances beyond her control. Her non-tax debts were 
attributable to those circumstances, and she acted responsibly to resolve them. While I 
considered her overseas location, primarily in a combat zone, between 2005 and 2014, 
Applicant did not establish that circumstances beyond her control largely contributed to 
the accumulation of federal tax debt. However, to the extent that all or part of it is 
deemed so, she did not meet her burden to establish that she acted responsibly to 
address it.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established. AG ¶ 20(d) is established as to the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g. However, Applicant did not meet her burden to 
establish AG ¶ 20(d) as to her federal tax debt.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. While Applicant articulated a reasonable basis to 
dispute at least some portion of her federal tax debt, she did not provide any 
documentary proof to substantiate her dispute or sufficient evidence of actions taken to 
resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is not established. I credit Applicant with communicating with the IRS, 
establishing an electronic payment account to pay her federal taxes, and hiring any 
attorney to help her sort through suspected errors in the balance owed on her federal 
tax debt. However, she did not provide any corroborating documentation to show that 
she established a payment plan or made any payments to the IRS. 
 
I considered the progress that Applicant has made in tackling her delinquent 
debts, and the fact that she is not required to be debt-free in order to qualify for a 
security clearance. 35 I also considered that Applicant incurred delinquent taxes during a 
                                                          
35 ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (An applicant does not have to be debt-free in 
order to qualify for a security clearance. Rather, all that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant 
conduct” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan). 
 
9 
 
period in which she resided primarily overseas in a combat zone. However, Applicant 
failed to timely pay her federal taxes over an extended number of years, and her federal 
tax debt remains unresolved five years later. Moreover, she failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to establish that she acted responsibly to address it, especially during the 
period when she was not located in a combat zone. Thus, I cannot conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the Guideline F concerns at this time.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her failure to pay delinquent federal taxes. Accordingly, Applicant 
has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g: For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
