 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00897 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He failed to present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from a history of tax problems 
consisting of two state tax liens and approximately $185,000 in back taxes owed to a 
state tax authority. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on August 8, 2014. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on September 12, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
 
2 
 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
based on two state tax liens for $31,193 in back taxes.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 1, 2016. He requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. His response consisted of a one-page 
memorandum in explanation. He did not include any attachments or enclosures.  
 
On November 23, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on November 28, 2016, who received it January 17, 2017. He replied within 
30 days from receipt of the information as required. His reply consisted of a two-page 
memorandum in explanation without attachments or enclosures, which is made part of 
the record as Exhibit A. The case was assigned to me October 1, 2017.     
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Upon initial review of the case, I reopened the record on my own motion to 
provide Applicant an opportunity to provide documentation concerning the two state tax 
liens at issue. I did so via an e-mail to Applicant and Department Counsel on October 2, 
2017, with a deadline of October 17, 2017. Thereafter, I granted Applicant’s request for 
an extension of time during a conference call with the parties on October 16, 2017. 
Applicant was provided an additional 30 days, with a November 17, 2017 deadline, to 
provide documented proof that the two state tax liens are resolved or are being 
resolved. He timely replied, and his response is made part of the record as Exhibits B, 
C, and D without objections.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance 
previously granted to him. He is president, chief executive officer, and chairman of the 
board of a small company that provides certain components to the U.S. military. His 
employment history includes honorable service in the U.S. military, both active duty and 
reserve, ending with his retirement. His educational background includes a bachelor’s 
degree awarded in 1978 by a U.S. military academy. He has held a security clearance 
for many years during his military service or during his employment in the defense 
industry or both. He married in 1978, and he and his wife have three adult children.  
 
In his August 2014 security clearance application, Applicant did not disclose 
delinquent financial accounts, delinquent taxes, or other financial problems.1 During the 
subsequent background investigation, he stated that he had no knowledge about the 
two state tax liens, although he also stated that the liens may be related to his 
business.2 The SOR alleged two state tax liens in the amounts of $3,193 and $28,590. 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 2. 
 
2 Exhibit 4 at 4.  
 
3 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the liens in his answer to the SOR. The state tax 
liens are also established by credit reports from August 2014 and June 2015.3 The 
reports show that the lien for $3,193 was filed in December 2013, and the lien for 
$28,590 was filed in March 2011. Applicant attributes the tax liens to the operation of his 
business.4 In addition, in May 2010, he satisfied a state tax lien filed against him or his 
company in November 2009.5 The 2009 lien is not alleged in the SOR, and the amount 
of the lien is not reflected in Applicant’s documentation.6 
 
Applicant retained the services of a firm to assist him dealing with the state tax 
authority. In April 2017, Applicant was advised by the firm that the state tax authority 
had confirmed that he no longer had an outstanding unpaid employment income tax 
liability.7 At the same time, he was advised by the firm that the state tax authority had 
accepted an installment payment agreement on a total tax liability of approximately 
$185,641.8 The agreement called for Applicant to pay $200 monthly beginning October 
28, 2016, until his liability is paid in full. Applicant understands that the two state tax 
liens will remain in effect until the installment payment agreement has been satisfied.9 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.10 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.11 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”12 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
                                                          
3 Exhibits 5 and 6.  
 
4 Exhibit 3 (Response to Interrogatories); Answer to SOR; and Exhibit A.   
 
5 Exhibit B.  
 
6 Exhibit B.  
 
7 Exhibit C at 1.  
 
8 Exhibit C at 2.  
 
9 Exhibit D.  
 
10 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
11 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
12 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
4 
 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.13 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.14 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.15 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.16 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.17 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.18 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.19 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.20 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.21 
 
                                                          
13 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
15 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
16 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
21 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income 
tax as required;   
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. A state tax authority 
placed two liens against him, first in 2011 and then in 2013, for more than $31,000 in 
back taxes, and he now owes more than $185,000 to the state tax authority. In light of 
the length of time that the liens have been in effect and the large amount of money 
involved, this is one of the more serious tax cases I have seen for some time. It is a 
social, civic, and legal obligation to voluntarily pay taxes when due. The failure to pay 
taxes when due bears close examination and is a matter of serious concern to the 
federal government.22 This pattern of conduct also suggests that he has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance 
with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified information. An 
applicant who has a history of not fulfilling their tax obligations may be said not to have 
demonstrated the high degree of judgment and reliability required for access to 
classified information.  
 
 Applicant presented some evidence in reform and rehabilitation. He satisfied a 
state tax lien of an unknown amount in 2010. He has entered into an installment 
payment agreement to address his current tax liability with the state tax authority. That’s 
some progress. But he is still facing a mountain of back taxes, which will take years to 
                                                          
22 The General Accountability Office (GAO) expressed serious concern over the relationship between tax 
delinquents and clearance holders in its July 28, 2014 report, Security Clearances: Tax Debts Owed by 
DOD Employees and Contractors, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/665052.pdf. 
 
 
6 
 
repay at the rate of $200 monthly on a six-figure tax debt. Moreover, the record 
suggests that Applicant does not have a good grasp of or handle on his tax obligations. 
This is established by the fact the he did not report the two state tax liens on his 2014 
security clearance application. He also stated he had no knowledge about the liens 
during the 2014 background investigation. Given his longstanding history of tax 
problems, additional time is necessary for Applicant to establish that he can remain in 
compliance with the installment payment agreement. In other words, he has taken the 
initial steps in the right direction, but he has some distance to travel before he reaches 
the destination. Accordingly, at this time, Applicant is not an acceptable security risk.  
 
 Applicant’s history of tax problems creates doubt about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the 
whole-person concept, and I certainly gave Applicant credit for his many years of 
honorable military service and his years as a clearance holder. Accordingly, I conclude 
that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
