1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 16-02106 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has steadily been making payments into a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan for 
more than two and a half years. In sum, he has reduced his debts by approximately 
$36,000, nearly half of the amount that was originally delinquent. Under these 
circumstances, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was unable to 
find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him security clearance eligibility 
for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On October 26, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations 
and requesting a decision based on the written record instead of a hearing. On October 29, 
2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), consisting of a 
memorandum with seven attachments (Items 1-7). On December 14, 2017, Applicant filed 
a response (Item 8), and on August 8, 2017, the case was assigned to me.  
 
On October 19, 2017, I re-opened the record sua sponte to allow Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. (Item 10) Within the time allotted, Applicant 
submitted a memorandum (Item 10) requesting the inclusion of four documents (Items 11 – 
14) into the record. Department Counsel did not object (Item 15), and I admitted the 
supplementary documents into the record. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 6 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on March 18, 2015. Such reports are inadmissible without 
authenticating witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  Consequently, I have not considered this 
document in my disposition of this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 55-year-old married man with an adult child. After graduating from 
high school, he earned a vocational degree, followed by an undergraduate degree. He has 
held a security clearance since 2006. (Item 2 at 27) 
 
 In 2002, Applicant and his wife began working at new jobs. Both jobs were the most 
well-paying jobs they had ever held. With ample discretionary income, they began making 
several big purchases, such as buying new cars and remodeling their home. Gradually, 
they began overspending. Beginning in 2007, they decided to forego paying their local 
income taxes, with the intention of using the money to pay their debts and “catch[ing] up” 
on their income taxes later. (Item 1 at 3) 
 
 In 2010, Applicant’s father-in-law died. Applicant and his wife paid the burial 
expenses, receiving no help from any of their other family members. (Item 1 at 1) In 2011, 
Applicant’s wife, upon whose income he was dependent to help make ends meet, lost her 
job. In 2012, Applicant’s mother-in-law died. Applicant and his wife again assumed sole 
responsibility for the burial expenses. 
 
3 
 
 Unable to get control of his finances, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection in 2013. (Item 1 at 3) After adhering to the plan for seven months, he came to 
believe that he could manage his debt repayment efforts without using the bankruptcy 
process. (Item 1 at 3) Consequently, he moved to dismiss the bankruptcy proceedings. 
 
 Applicant then began taking steps to get his finances under control, cutting off his 
cable television service, selling one of his cars, and refinancing his mortgage. (Item 1 at 3) 
Applicant’s efforts at debt reduction were unsuccessful, prompting him to re-file for Chapter 
13 bankruptcy protection in March 2015. By then, he had not filed any municipal tax returns 
from 2007 to 2014, and he had incurred $85,000 of unsecured debt. (Item 4 at 30) 
 
 Applicant filed his delinquent municipal income tax returns in 2015, shortly after he 
re-filed for bankruptcy. The delinquent municipal income tax totals $8,537, and is included 
in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. (Item 4 at 25, 28) Applicant completed court-ordered 
financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. (Item 13) He pays approximately 
$1,265 per month, deducted every other week from his pay, through the bankruptcy plan. 
(Item 8, Response at 3)   To date, he has made Chapter 13 bankruptcy payments totaling 
$36,170. (Item 11) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies, together with his failure to file his municipal 
income tax returns between 2007 and 2014, trigger the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(f), “failure to file . . . local income tax returns or failure to 
pay . . . local income tax as required.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
 Between 2010 and 2012, Applicant incurred unexpected expenses related to the 
death of his parents-in-law, and a decrease in income when his wife lost her job. Although 
these circumstances were beyond his control, he did not file his municipal income tax 
returns during this period, and he had begun falling behind on the repayment of his debts 
three years before his father-in-law died. Subparagraph 20(b) is inapplicable. 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter bankruptcy protection in 2015. He arranged to pay the 
municipal income tax delinquency through the bankruptcy plan.  He has steadily been 
making payments consistent with the plan. Since filing for bankruptcy, he has reduced his 
total financial delinquency by more than $36,000. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(g) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Although circumstances beyond Applicant’s control compounded Applicant’s 
financial problems, they did not cause them, as Applicant was already behind on his debts 
in 2007 when he opted to stop filing his municipal income tax returns. Moreover, failure to 
file income tax returns raises a serious security concern, as it “suggests that an applicant 
has a problem with complying with well-established governmental rules and systems.” 
(ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)). Conversely, his tax issues are 
now resolved, as he has filed his delinquent municipal income taxes and has been paying 
the delinquency through the Chapter 13 bankruptcy process. In addition, since filing for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection and completing the requisite counseling, he has made 
more than $36,000 of payments into the bankruptcy debt plan. He has made these 
payments steadily for more than two and a half years. Under these circumstances, I 
conclude that the strong presence of rehabilitation outweighs the nature and seriousness 
of Applicant’s incurrence of the delinquencies and failure to file his municipal income tax 
returns on time. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
6 
 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
national security eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
