 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03661 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant has been in a payment plan to resolve his 
tax issues since at least September 2015. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 7, 2017. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on May 25, 2017, and provided a response. The documents appended to the 
FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A and B, are admitted without objection.  On October 25, 2017, I opened the 
record to allow the parties to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
information about the status of his tax repayment plan, which was admitted as AE C, 
without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since July 2013. He completed a 
security clearance application, his first, in September 2015. Applicant disclosed financial 
issues, including outstanding Federal taxes for the years 2010 through 2012 and that he 
filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition that was discharged in January 2010. Applicant’s 
background investigation revealed state tax issues. The SOR alleges and Applicant 
admits having 11 state tax liens filed against him between February and May 2015 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.k), receiving Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.l), and 
owing Federal income taxes for the 2010 through 2012 tax years (SOR ¶ 1.m).  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began between 2004 and 2006, when he was self-
employed. Applicant admits that while he was good salesman, he was not a good 
business man and did not manage his state sales tax obligations properly, resulting in 
the state tax liens alleged in the SOR. Although he incurred state tax debt, Applicant 
believed that his finances were otherwise stable until 2008 when the country 
experienced a recession. Applicant’s employer, a cable company, cut Applicant’s hours. 
Around the same time, Applicant’s wife lost her job and began experiencing medical 
problems. With the lower income and increase in expenses caused by his wife’s 
medical treatment, Applicant fell behind on his bills. Applicant filed for bankruptcy 
protection in 2009, and his petition was discharged in January 2010.  
 
 Despite receiving a discharge of debts in 2010, Applicant was unable to pay his 
outstanding tax debt. On his security clearance application, Applicant indicated that he 
owed $7,000 in Federal taxes. He explained that by September 2015 he had reduced 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
the balance by half and was paying the remaining half through payroll deductions. In 
September 2016, Applicant retained a lawyer to help him resolve his state tax debt. 
Applicant agreed to pay a $3,500 down payment and 24 monthly payments of $437 to 
resolve his outstanding $10,500 balance. Applicant is in compliance with this payment 
plan.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.3  
 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
4 
 
The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has a 
history of not meeting his financial obligations and an inability to satisfy debts.4 The 
record also establishes that Applicant has failed to pay Federal and state income taxes 
as required.5 Applicant’s history of financial problems between 2008 and 2010 were 
caused by events beyond his control. His decision to file for bankruptcy protection was 
reasonable given his circumstances. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debt during 
those years as he coped with his and his wife’s loss of employment and her medical 
expenses constitute circumstances unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.6   
 
Applicant’s tax issues were caused by his failure to properly manage his state 
and federal tax obligations; however, his efforts to resolve his tax problems are enough 
to mitigate the security concern raised by his behavior. Applicant provided evidence that 
he has made arrangements with the proper tax authority to pay the amount of taxes 
owed and he is in compliance with those arrangements.7 The record also establishes 
that Applicant initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve his outstanding tax debt.8  
 
Accordingly, no doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Although Applicant failed to properly manage his Federal and state 
obligations for many years, he has taken the appropriate steps to remediate the issue. 
An Applicant is not required to be debt-free, all that is required is that he make a plan to 
resolve his delinquent debt and show that he has taken steps to effectuate that plan. 
Applicant has done so. Accordingly, his request for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:     For Applicant 
                                                          
4 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
5 AG ¶ 19(f). 
 
6 AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
7 AG ¶ 20(g).  
 
8 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
