 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03990 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns raised by his 
girlfriend’s Turkish citizenship and her family in Turkey, including her mother’s and 
sister’s employment with the Turkish government. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1  
  
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 3, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on April 24, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM and responded on May 20, 2017, with documents that I have 
marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017.  
 
The Government exhibits identified as Items 1 through 4 and AE A are admitted 
in evidence without objection. Department Counsel requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Turkey. The request was included in the record as Item 5. 
The request is not admitted in evidence but I have taken administrative notice of the 
facts contained in Item 5, as summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 67-year-old, native-born U.S. 
citizen and resident. He obtained a high school diploma in 1968, a bachelor’s degree in 
1975, and a master’s degree in 1997. He worked for a defense contractor for 40 years 
from 1984 until he retired in 2012. He was first granted a DOD security clearance in the 
early 1980s. In January 2013, he returned to work as a part-time engineer when his 
current defense contractor contacted him for an employment opportunity. As of May 
2017, he had never been married and did not have any children. He has owned his 
home in state A in the United States since 1984.2   
 
Applicant’s girlfriend, age 37, is a native-born citizen of Turkey residing in the 
United States. Applicant met her in May 2007 when he taught dancing lessons as a 
hobby to university students in state A. They maintained social contact once yearly. By 
the summer of 2008, they became close friends and began dating. After she obtained 
her doctorate degree from the university in 2009, she moved to state B where she 
worked for another university until 2012, then a museum until August 2016. They 
maintained a long-distance relationship, and from 2009 through August 2016, they 
telephoned each other daily and visited each other two to three times monthly. She then 
moved to state C. As of May 2017, she worked as a professor for another university.3 
 
She remains in the United States on a work visa that her employer renews 
biannually to annually. She hopes to become a tenured professor and thereby eligible 
for a green card. Applicant stated in July 2016 that he planned to remain a bachelor as 
he did not fully trust his girlfriend, but he enjoys ballroom dancing and spending time 
                                                          
2 Response to the SOR; Items 3, 4; AE A. 
 
3 Response to the SOR; Items 3, 4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
with her. He did not discuss his personal finances with her. In May 2017, Applicant 
stated that he had seen her in person only five times since August 2016.4 
 
 Applicant stated that while his girlfriend knows he designs jet engines, she has 
not inquired, nor has he volunteered, specific details about his work. She is neither 
aware that he has held a security clearance, nor has she ever asked him related 
questions. She has never attempted to recruit him to work as a foreign agent or asked 
him to commit espionage. He would immediately report any type of inappropriate 
questioning or request for classified information by her to his security personnel.5 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend’s parents and sister are citizens and residents of Turkey. 
Her father, in his mid-sixties, is a teacher at a private high school. Her mother, in her 
early sixties, and her sister, in her early thirties, both work in economics for the Turkish 
government. Applicant has vacationed in the United States with his girlfriend and her 
family, during which times they split the expenses equally. He has never offered or been 
asked to provide any financial support to them. They have neither inquired nor has he 
volunteered information to them about his work. He had not traveled to Turkey as of 
May 2017, and he had no future intention to do so. He otherwise has no direct contact 
with them, so he does not consider them to be close foreign national contacts and he is 
not bound to them by obligation or affection.6 
 
 Applicant stated that he has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the United States. While his parents are deceased, he has four brothers, three sisters, 
extended family members, and close friends who are native-born U.S. citizens and 
residents. In addition to the home that he has owned since 1984, he also owns a 
second property in the United States that he purchased to prevent a close friend from 
losing it to foreclosure. He has never occupied that property, and his friend is repaying 
him. During his retirement, he financially supported himself with retirement income and 
savings. He is currently financially supported by retirement income, social security 
benefits, and $1.5 million in stocks. He enjoys skiing, ballroom dancing, completing 
home projects, participating in church activities, and performing community service. He 
stated that he has complied with all reporting requirements, to include reporting his 
girlfriend and her family on his February 2016 security clearance application and 
discussing them during his July 2016 interview. He stated that he would resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States.7   
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Response to the SOR; Items 3, 4; AE A. 
 
5 Response to the SOR; Items 3, 4; AE A. 
 
6 Response to the SOR; Items 3, 4; AE A. 
 
7 Response to the SOR; Items 3, 4; AE A. 
 
 
4 
Turkey 
 
 There have been violent, terrorist attacks in Turkey, and the possibility of 
terrorist attacks against U.S. citizens and interests remains high. The U.S. Department 
of State updated its travel warning in January 2017 to warn U.S. citizens to carefully 
consider the need to travel to Turkey and to avoid travel to southeast Turkey due to the 
persistent threat of terrorism in that area; it also placed restrictions on official travel by 
U.S. Government personnel to Istanbul and certain areas in southeast Turkey. By 
virtue of its location, the presence of international transport hubs on its territory, and its 
long border with Syria and Iraq, Turkey is the main transit route for foreign terrorist 
fighters into Syria and Iraq.  
 
 The most significant human rights problems in Turkey in 2016 included 
inconsistent access to due process, government interference with freedom of 
expression, and inadequate protection of civilians. Other human rights problems 
included overcrowding and substandard conditions in prisons. The government fired 
more than 3,000 members of the judiciary, creating an atmosphere of fear that further 
limited judicial independence and complicated or delayed court proceedings. The 
government did not effectively protect women, children, members of ethnic and 
religious minorities, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex persons from 
threats, discrimination, and violence.  
 
In 2015, the U.S. Department of State also noted abuses of religious freedom 
by the Turkish government. These included its refusal to recognize the places of 
worship of Alevi Muslims and to exempt Alevi children from compulsory Sunni Islamic 
instruction; its failure to recognize the right to conscientious objection to military 
service; its continued prosecution of individuals for openly disrespecting Islamic 
beliefs; and its continued limitation on the rights of non-Muslim minorities.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
6 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend is a Turkish citizen, and her parents and sister are citizens 
and residents of Turkey. Her mother and sister work for the Turkish government. Her 
family in Turkey creates a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
 
7 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). While Applicant saw his girlfriend in person only five times between 
August 2016 and May 2017, he has nonetheless maintained his relationship with her. 
Though his contact with his girlfriend’s family is limited, he vacations with them in the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. 
 
Applicant complied with reporting requirements, to include reporting his girlfriend 
and her family on his February 2016 security clearance application and discussing them 
during his July 2016 interview. AG ¶ 8(e) applies. 
 
 Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen and resident. His immediate and extended 
family and close friends are also native-born U.S. citizens and residents. He owns two 
properties in the United States, including the home he has lived in since 1984. He is 
currently financially supported by retirement income, social security benefits, and $1.5 
million in stocks. As of May 2017, he had never traveled to Turkey and he had no future 
intention to do so. In July 2016, he stated that he planned to remain a bachelor as he 
did not fully trust his girlfriend, but he enjoys ballroom dancing and spending time with 
her. Applicant met his burden to demonstrate that he would resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Applicant’s ties to Turkey are outweighed by his more substantial ties in the 
United States. I am confident that he will resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign connections. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
   
  
 
_______________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
