 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03601 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. He successfully mitigated the security concerns under Guideline C, foreign 
preference. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions 
issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 12, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 30, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 30, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on September 20, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. There were no 
objections to the Government’s exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on September 29, 2017.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Bangladesh. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications.2 The facts are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He was born in what is now Bangladesh. He married in 
1982 in Bangladesh and his three sons, ages 32, 27, and 22, were born there. He 
attended a technical college in Bangladesh from 1972 to 1974. Applicant and his family 
immigrated to the United States in 2006. He became a naturalized citizen in 2011. He has 
worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since November 2014. His wife and 
children also became naturalized citizens, but it is unknown what year.3  
 
 Applicant joined the Bangladesh Air Force when he was 18 years old and worked 
in the police department of the military. He volunteered to serve as soon as he could 
because it was considered a very good job. Applicant served in the Bangladesh military 
from 1976 to 1994. He retired and receives a military pension from the Bangladesh 
government that is deposited in a local Bangladesh bank each month. He estimated it 
was less than $50 a month. When he travels to Bangladesh he uses the account. His 
second cousin, who lives in Bangladesh, is authorized to make Applicant’s pension 
deposits into his account and has done so since 2011. Applicant testified that he was not 
involved in combat. He stated he was unaware of the political and government turmoil 
that was happening while he was serving. He was selected to deploy to serve in a foreign 
country, but it was detected that he is color blind, so he was denied the assignment and 
was forced to retire. He testified that he does not maintain contact with any members of 
the military.4 
                                                          
2 HE II are the source documents. 
 
3 Tr. 17-19, 34; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 19-21, 37-43; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s mother, two brothers, and a sister are citizens and residents of 
Bangladesh. He had another sister who passed away. He talks with his mother weekly by 
telephone. His mother lived with him and his wife after they married. His mother now lives 
with his brothers. He visits his family in Bangladesh about once a year. He visited them 
in March 2017 for about a month and in November 2016 for three months. Before then, 
he returned in 2011 after he became a U.S. citizen and again in 2013, 2014, and 2015. 
His wife accompanies him when he returns to Bangladesh.5  
 
 One of Applicant’s sons married a Bangladeshi woman and they live there. 
Applicant, his wife, and other two sons traveled to Bangladesh for the wedding. His son 
is hoping to obtain a visa for his wife to come to the United States, but she is pregnant 
and unable to travel. Applicant’s wife intends on traveling to Bangladesh for the birth of 
the child in October. Applicant occasionally provides his family money if they need it. 
Applicant’s father owned land in Bangladesh and passed it on to Applicant’s brothers. 
Applicant has no assets in Bangladesh.6 
 
 One of Applicant’s brothers is a pharmacist for the Bangladesh health department. 
He speaks with him every two to three weeks. His other brother owns his own store. He 
speaks with him every couple of months. His sister is a homemaker. She has children, 
some of whom are married with their own children. Applicant has contact with them a 
couple of times a month. His sister’s husband is a retired firefighter. His deceased sister 
also had children. Her husband’s occupation is unknown.7  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Bangladesh. His wife has four 
siblings who are citizens and residents of Bangladesh. Applicant and his wife visit her 
family when they go to Bangladesh.8  
 
 Applicant owns a home in the United States worth about $150,000. He also owns 
two rental homes worth about $100,000 combined. He does not have any investment 
accounts and has about $2,000 in savings.9  
 
Bangladesh 
 
 The United States recognized Bangladesh following a 1972 war between Pakistan 
and India. Since then it has experienced a series of military coups following its 1971 
independence. The country returned to democratic rule in 2008 and is now a 
parliamentary republic. 
                                                          
5 Tr. 21-23, 26-30, 35. 
 
6 Tr. 26, 43-44, 46. 
 
7 Tr. 36-37. 
 
8 Tr. 24, 29. 
 
9 Tr. 31-33, 45. 
 
4 
 
 
 The U.S. State Department has assessed Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh, as 
being a high-threat location for terrorist activity directed at or affecting official U.S. 
Government interests. In 2017, it issued a warning to U.S. citizens of continuing threats 
from terrorist groups in the country, and only allows adult family members of U.S. 
Government personnel to remain in or return to Dhaka. Those American citizens living 
there must do so under strict security guidelines.  
 
 Since 2015, there have been more than 30 terrorist acts by ISIS-affiliated terrorists 
that targeted foreigners, religious minorities, police, and security services. Other militant 
groups have used the country for sheltering foreign jihadists, as well as planning and 
launching operations domestically and throughout the region. 
 
 The U.S. State Department’s 2016 Human Rights Report noted that extremist 
organizations claiming affiliation with terrorist groups had increased their activities in 
Bangladesh, executing high-profile attacks on religious minorities, academics, foreigners, 
human rights activities, and minorities based on their sexual orientation. The Bangladesh 
government has responded with a strong anti-militancy drive, which human rights groups 
claim has resulted in increased extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detentions for purposes of 
extortion, torture, and other human rights abuses. The government further used 
counterterrorism efforts to justify restrictions on civil and political rights.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
10 HE I. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(e), and 7(f) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.”11 
 
 The United States has serious concerns about terrorist activities in Bangladesh 
that are directed toward U.S. Government interests and its citizens. Since 2015, there 
have been more than 30 terrorist acts by ISIS-affiliated terrorists and its affiliates that 
targeted foreigners, religious minorities, police, and security services. Other militant 
groups have used the country for sheltering foreign jihadists, as well as planning and 
launching operations domestically and throughout the region. Bangladesh’s human rights 
record raises concerns. Terrorist groups have increased their activities in Bangladesh and 
the Government has responded with a strong anti-militancy drive, which have increased 
human right abuses by the government and often used to justify restrictions on civil and 
political rights.  
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s mother, brothers, sister, and mother-in-law are citizens and residents 
of Bangladesh. Applicant and his wife visit both of their families in Bangladesh about once 
a year. He maintains close contact with his mother by talking on the phone a couple of 
times a week. He also maintains regular contact with his siblings. Applicant’s wife also 
maintains regular contact with her mother. Applicant and his wife have strong family ties 
with their relatives who are citizens and residence of Bangladesh. These ties create a 
heightened risk, a potential foreign influence concern, and a potential conflict of interest. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Applicant has a small bank account in Bangladesh and his $50 military pension is 
deposited in it each month. Applicant owns a home in the U.S. and has two rental 
properties with an aggregate worth of approximately $250,000. I find his bank account in 
Bangladesh does not rise to the level of creating a heightened risk or security concern. 
AG ¶ 7(f) does not apply. 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant and his wife have ongoing relationships with their families in Bangladesh. 
They visit their families about once a year in Bangladesh. He contacts his mother several 
times a week. He and his siblings have regular contact. His wife maintains contact with 
her mother and they visit her when they are in the country. Their closeness is also 
evidenced by Applicant generously providing money to them when it is needed.  
 
I cannot find that Applicant’s relationship with his and his wife’s families is casual 
or infrequent as they maintain regular contact. This relationship may place him in a 
position of having to choose between his family and the interests of the United States. 
His familial relationships create a conflict of interest that could place him in a position of 
having to choose between the United States and his family. I cannot find that his sense 
of obligation to his family is minimal. Considering the terrorist problems in Bangladesh 
 
8 
 
 
that target U.S. citizens and the human rights issues, I cannot find that it is unlikely that 
Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between his family in 
Bangladesh and the interests of the United States. I find AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) do not 
apply.  
 
Guideline C: Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern regarding foreign preference:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decision that  are harmful to the interests of the United 
States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. national 
interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the fact that a 
U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not disqualifying without 
an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at concealment. The same 
is true for a U.S. citizen’s exercise of any right or privilege of foreign 
citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign 
citizenship.  
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: (1) 
assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, position, or 
political office in a foreign government or military organization; and 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law.  
 
Applicant receives a modest pension from the Bangladesh government for his 
military service, which ceased in 1994, when he retired. His relationship with the 
Bangladeshi military ended at that time. He earned this pension before he immigrated to 
the United States and became a naturalized citizen. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude his acceptance of this pension indicates a preference for Bangladesh over the 
United States. I find in Applicant’s favor under Guideline C, foreign preference.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 61 years old and became a U.S. citizen six years ago. He has family 
members who live in Bangladesh, and with whom he has regular contact, both by traveling 
there and visiting them and by telephone. The heightened risks raised by these contacts 
continue to raise security concerns and are unmitigated. Applicant’s acceptance of a 
small military pension does not raise security concerns. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
under Guideline C, foreign preference, but failed to mitigate them under Guideline B, 
foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
