 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02976 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 1, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines H and J.1 
(Item 1.) The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
 On November 21, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR (RSOR), 
and he requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
(Item 1.)  On December 19, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits. (Items 
1-5.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on February 10, 2017. 
Applicant submitted no additional documents into evidence. The case was assigned to 
this Administrative Judge on October 1, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He has never been married, and he has no children. 
He is a high school graduate. Applicant is employed by a defense contractor as a 
Material Technical Aide, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his 
employment in the defense sector. (Item 3.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)   
 
 The SOR lists three allegations (1.a. through 1.c.) under Adjudicative Guideline 
H.  
 
 1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in September 2001 and 
charged with possession of marijuana. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. 
(Item 1.)  
 
 1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana from January 2008 to at 
least March 2016, after he had been granted a DoD security clearance. Applicant 
admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
 1.c. The SOR alleges that Applicant stated during his last security clearance 
investigation that he intended to continue to use marijuana in the future. Applicant 
admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has engaged in criminal acts, which create doubt 
about his judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness. The SOR lists one allegations 
(2.a.) regarding criminal conduct, under Adjudicative Guideline J.  
 
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s conduct as set forth in 
subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b., above, is a concern under Guideline J. (Item 1.) Applicant 
admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any substance misuse;   
 
(c) Illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and  
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse.  
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual 
allegations under SOR ¶ 25.(a), (b), and (g). Applicant used marijuana and was 
involved with illegal drug conduct, for many years. More significantly for many of those 
years he held a DoD security clearance. And what is most troubling and is an absolute 
bar to holding a security clearance, Applicant has indicated that he intends to continue 
using marijuana in the future.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26. Because of all the reasons cited in the paragraph 
above, I find that none of the mitigating factors can be considered in this case. I find 
Guideline H against Applicant.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(b) evidence . . .  of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual 
was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted.  
 
While Applicant was only arrested for possession of marijuana in 2001, his drug 
usage continued, while holding a security clearance, from 2008 to as recently as at least 
March 2016. This conduct gives rise to concerns about Applicant’s judgment and 
reliability because of the nature of the continuing criminal offenses. The aforementioned 
disqualifying condition has been established.  
 
Because Applicant’s criminal conduct of using marijuana occurred continually 
and as recently as 2016, and because Applicant has indicated that he intends to 
continue committing the criminal conduct in the future, I do not find that any Criminal 
Conduct mitigating conditions are applicable under AG ¶ 32. Applicant’s criminal past 
continues to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and judgment. I, therefore, find Guideline 
J against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct 
security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.-1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
 
