 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02219 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 7, 2015. On 
November 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines H and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes resulting 
from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 5, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 15, 
2017, and the case was assigned to me on July 19, 2017. On August 15, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 11, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
but did not present the testimony of any witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. 
He asked for additional time to submit two letters from colleagues attesting to his good 
character and documentary evidence that all his random drug tests were negative. (Tr. 
12, 54.) I kept the record open until September 25, 2017, to enable him to submit 
documentary evidence. He did not submit anything further. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on September 19, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d 
and 2.a. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old security consultant employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2015. He graduated from high school in May 2007. He attended a community 
college from May 2007 to May 2008 but did not receive a degree. He worked in various 
private-sector jobs involving information technology from May 2007 until he began his 
current job. He has never married, has no children, and has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana and driving a vehicle with 
defective equipment in December 2012, after being stopped by police for driving a vehicle 
with one headlight out. Applicant was driving and another person was in the front 
passenger seat. According to the police report, the police noticed a strong smell of 
marijuana and observed multiple marijuana cigarettes and a scale in the vehicle. 
Applicant admitted purchasing the marijuana and splitting it with his passenger. Applicant 
disclosed this arrest in his SCA and stated that the police found a small bag of marijuana 
under the passenger seat and his passenger eventually admitted ownership of the 
marijuana. The prosecutor filed a nolle prosequi. (GX 1 at 28; GX 5; Tr. 24.) At the 
hearing, Applicant testified that he had not smoked marijuana before being stopped by 
the police. He testified that he did not purchase the marijuana that was found in the vehicle 
and he did not remember telling the police officer that had purchased it. (Tr. 25-27.) He 
testified that, about six months after being arrested, he stopped associating with the 
person who was arrested with him (Tr. 27-28.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana in July 2014 after being 
stopped for speeding. He was driving with three passengers. The police observed 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
marijuana in the vehicle. He also was charged with littering because the police observed 
him throwing small pieces of paper out of the vehicle. The disposition of the littering 
charge is not reflected in the record. In December 2014, Applicant pleaded not guilty to 
the marijuana charge, but he was convicted and sentenced to 30 days in jail, which was 
suspended, suspension of his driver’s license for six months, and a fine and court costs 
totaling $575.  
 
Applicant appealed and pleaded guilty under a plea agreement, and his sentence 
was reduced to a $150 fine and restriction of his driver’s license for six months.3 He 
completed the six-month suspension of his license without incident. (GX 2 at 16-17; GX 
4.) He testified that he no longer associates with the three passengers who were in the 
vehicle with him. (Tr. 30.) However, he later admitted that one of the passengers was his 
cousin, with whom he still has contact at family reunions and “stuff like that.” (Tr. 34.) 
 
In a personal subject interview (PSI) on April 6, 2016, Applicant told an investigator 
that he was given marijuana on the day before July 2014 arrest to help him cope with the 
grief of grandfather’s death. He said that this incident was the first and last time that he 
used marijuana, because he did not enjoy the feeling he experienced from using it. (GX 
2 at 17.) In response to DOHA interrogatories in August 2016, he again stated that the 
July incident was his first and last use of marijuana. (GX 2 at 3.) He stated, “I, 
unequivocally, have no intentions or desires to indulge in marijuana or associate with any 
person who uses marijuana.” (GX 2 at 6.) However, at the hearing, he admitted that he 
initially tried marijuana in 2005, and he admitted that he should have disclosed this 
previous marijuana use in the August 2016 interrogatories. (Tr. 28-29.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana in December 2015 after being 
observed driving a vehicle with the license plate light out. The vehicle was registered in 
the name of Applicant’s brother. The police found a small quantity of marijuana in the 
center console. According to the police report, Applicant was asked if he had anything 
illegal in the car, such as marijuana, and Applicant answered “No.” After further 
conversation, he admitted that he might have something illegal, and then he admitted that 
there was marijuana in the center console. He told the police officer that he had purchased 
the marijuana. (GX 3 at 3.)  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that a friend left the marijuana in the vehicle after 
he gave her a ride home from work, but that he told the police that the marijuana was his 
because he did not want to get his friend in trouble. (Tr. 35-36.) In the April 2016 PSI, 
Applicant told the investigator that he pleaded no contest and was convicted of marijuana 
possession. This conviction is reflected in the court records, but the sentence is not. 
Applicant told the investigator that he was sentenced to 30 days in jail, which was 
suspended, fined $100, and his driver’s license was restricted for six months. Applicant 
told the investigator that he was placed in a first-offender program. A county probation 
officer told the investigator that Applicant would complete the program if he tested 
                                                          
3 The law of the jurisdiction allows a de novo adjudication of the findings and sentence on appeal. 
 
4 
 
negative in three random drug tests, and the charges would be dismissed if he completed 
the program.4 (GX 2 at 22; GX 3.)  
 
In Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories, he stated that he tested negative 
in random drug tests in May, June, and August 2016. (GX 2 at 6.) However, at the hearing, 
he testified that he underwent six drug screenings that were negative. (Tr. 45-46.) The 
record was held open to enable him to submit evidence of his negative drug screenings, 
but he submitted nothing. There is no documentary evidence in the record reflecting 
whether the charges were ultimately dismissed. 
 
Applicant did not disclose the December 2015 arrest during the April 2016 PSI. In 
a follow-up PSI on June 6, 2016, and at the hearing, he stated that he did not disclose it 
because it occurred after he submitted his SCA and he thought that he was not required 
to discuss events that occurred after he submitted his SCA. (GX 2 at 23; Tr. 19.) At the 
hearing, Applicant admitted that he had “an inkling” that he should have disclosed the 
December 2015 arrest during the April 2016 PSI, but that he was embarrassed by it. (Tr. 
42, 53.)  
 
The summary of the June 2016 PSI states that it was conducted to resolve 
“unadmitted information” about the December 2015 arrest. Applicant testified that the 
investigator in the June 2016 PSI asked him if there was anything else that they should 
discuss, and he immediately told the investigator about the December 2015 arrest. (Tr. 
43.) He admitted that he did not attempt to correct his omission of the December 2015 
until the investigator contacted him to schedule the June 2016 PSI, at which time he told 
the investigator that he had something to discuss. (Tr. 54.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
                                                          
4 The record does not reflect why he would have been enrolled in a first-offender program after his 
December 2014 conviction. 
 
5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s arrest for possession of marijuana in December 2012 
(SOR ¶ 1.a), and his arrests and convictions for marijuana possession in July 2014 and 
December 2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). Applicant admitted all three allegations. The 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
 
6 
 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
 Neither of the above mitigating conditions are fully established. Assuming the 
truthfulness of Applicant’s declaration that his last marijuana involvement was in 
December 2015, the issue is whether his abstinence from marijuana use for almost two 
years is sufficient to establish the first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (“so long ago”) and the “pattern 
of abstinence” in AG ¶ 26(b). There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
sufficient time has passed without recurrence to mitigate drug involvement. The 
 
7 
 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the 
evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed” without further drug 
involvement, then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
 Applicant’s track record of candor regarding frequency, recency, and the 
circumstances of his marijuana use is less than perfect. Except for his marijuana use in 
July 2014, which he admitted, he has portrayed himself mostly as a bystander among 
drug users. He repeatedly stated that his marijuana use in July 2014 was his first and last 
use, but then admitted a previous use at the hearing. He dissembled regarding the 
question whether he purchased marijuana in December 2012. He has provided 
contradictory accounts of the ownership of the marijuana in December 2015.  
 
Applicant’s drug involvement was not “infrequent” and did not occur under unusual 
circumstances. He has acknowledged his drug involvement, but he has not totally 
disassociated himself from drug-using contacts. His cousin was involved in the July 2014 
incident, and he was driving his brother’s vehicle in the December 2015 incident. He has 
not significantly changed his environment. He was working for his current employer and 
had applied for a security clearance when the December 2015 incident occurred. He has 
repeatedly declared his intention to refrain from further drug involvement, but he has not 
submitted a signed statement that includes the provision for revocation of any clearance 
for further involvement. 
 
 Applicant asked for additional time to submit testimonials from colleagues 
regarding his duty performance, but submitted nothing after his request was granted. 
Thus, the record contains no evidence of the quality of his job performance. He did not 
avail himself of the opportunity to document his successful completion of a first-offender 
program. Based on the evidence, I am not convinced that the passage of time since his 
December 2015 arrest is sufficient to demonstrate that he has reformed and will not revert 
to his previous behavior once the pressure of qualifying for a security clearance is lifted.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c is cross-alleged under this guideline in 
SOR ¶ 2.a. SOR ¶ 2.b, which Applicant denied, alleges that his deliberately failed to 
disclose his December 2015 arrest for marijuana possession when he was interviewed 
by a security investigator in April 2016.  
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
8 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition for Applicant’s failure to disclose his December 
2015 arrest during April 2016 security interview is AG ¶16(b):  
 
[D]eliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of education are relevant 
to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he had “an inkling” that he should have 
mentioned the December 2015 arrest when he was interviewed in April 2016. He admitted 
that his intentional omission was due, at least in part, to embarrassment. His admissions 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(b). Two mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant did not act on his “inkling,” and made no 
attempt to correct his omission until he was contacted by the security investigator to 
schedule another interview. He correctly surmised that the follow-up interview was 
triggered by discovery of his December 2015 arrest, and he disclosed it during the June 
2016 interview, which was exactly two months later. He told the investigator that he failed 
to disclose because he believed that the interview was limited to events that occurred 
before he submitted his SCA. He abandoned this implausible explanation at the hearing, 
admitting that he had “an inkling” that he should have disclosed it but was embarrassed 
by it. There is no evidence suggesting that Applicant would have corrected his omission 
if he had not been contacted by the investigator regarding a follow-up interview. 
 
 
9 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s intentional omission was not “minor.” An 
intentional falsification during the security clearance process “strikes at the heart” of the 
process. See ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) 
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition for the drug involvement cross-alleged under 
this guideline is AG ¶ 16(c): 
 
[C]redible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 This disqualifying condition is established by Applicant’s admitted drug 
involvement and lack of candor regarding the frequency and circumstances in which it 
occurred. 
 
 The relevant mitigating conditions for Applicant’s drug involvement are AG ¶ 17(c), 
discussed above, and: 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate 
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(g): association with persons involved in criminal activities was 
unwitting, has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt 
upon the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged his drug 
involvement, but he has not obtained counseling or taken any other steps to reinforce his 
stated intention to abstain from illegal drugs. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established. Although Applicant has tended to downplay the 
seriousness of his drug involvement, he has admitted his arrests and convictions. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(g) is not fully established. Although Applicant has stopped associating 
with some of his drug-using friends, he continues to associate with family members who 
are or have been involved in illegal drug use. 
 
10 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).5 After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H and E, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his drug involvement and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
