 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01584 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela, C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 10, 2015. On 
July 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new 
AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued on or after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 6, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant 
received it on October 18, 2016. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 
through 5. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not provide a response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or 
submit documents. The case was assigned to me on September 25, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interviews that took place during the 2016 background 
investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is required under ¶ 
E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 prohibits 
receipt and consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating witnesses. The 
Directive provides no exception to the authentication requirement. Indeed, the 
authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits 
consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the written record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, 
waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood the 
implications of waiving an objection. Accordingly, given the lack of an authenticating 
witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in his Answer to the SOR. He specifically 
admitted the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d., however, he claimed that the debt had been 
satisfied. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He married in 2007 and has two sons, 18 and 7 years 
of age, and a 10-year-old daughter. He obtained his GED in 1995 during his 
incarceration from a 1995 conviction for two counts of burglary, both felonies. He has 
been employed by his present employer, a federal contractor, since September 2010. 
Prior to his current employment, he listed in his SCA that he was self-employed as a 
                                                          
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
 
3 
 
 
handyman from January 2004 to September 2010.  He left this employment after he 
was unable to make enough income to pay bills and support his family.  Applicant has 
been employed steadily since 2004.3 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from 
June 2015 and March 2016. Applicant admitted he owes the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e (ranging from $8,712 to $674; totaling $11,482). SOR ¶ 1.b  
does not list an amount; the allegation only stated that the debt was charged off. 
Applicant disclosed two different delinquent debts in his SCA owed to the same bank. 
The first bank debt Applicant listed the outstanding balance as $10,067. He disclosed 
that the financial issue began in October 2008 due to the poor economy, and listed that 
he was unable to make payments. The other bank debt listed on the SCA showed an 
outstanding balance of $1,324. Applicant disclosed that he was unable to make 
payments on this account as well. The June 2015 credit report reflected only one of the 
bank debts as a charged-off account in September 2009.  The account number is the 
same as listed by Applicant on the SCA for the account past due in the amount of 
$1,324. The other bank delinquent account reported on the June 2015 credit report 
showed that the account was purchased by another lender, with a high credit balance of 
$10,067.4  
 
 The largest debt, SOR ¶ 1.a ($8,712), is an automobile loan charged off in 
August 2014, also listed on the SCA for a 2005 truck. The debt cited in SOR ¶ 1.d, was 
claimed to have been paid by Applicant, however, this debt was reflected in the most 
recent March 2016 credit report as outstanding. On his SCA, Applicant disclosed 
delinquent child support (now current due to intercepted tax refund and not cited in the 
SOR), a delinquent credit card for $1,153, a delinquent account with a financial creditor 
for $1,231, and a delinquent account referred for collection in the amount of $1,854. He 
did not provide documents to show that he has paid, successfully disputed, or otherwise 
resolved any of the debts cited on the SOR.5  
 
I have inferred from Applicant’s SCA that his financial problems stem from a 
period of underemployment as a self-employed handyman during a time when the 
economy was slow. All of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR were brought to 
Applicant’s attention during his background investigation beginning in 2015, as required 
when financial issues are discovered during the typical background investigation. There 
is no evidence that he participated in any type of financial counseling. There is also no 
evidence to indicate that Applicant sought debt consolidation, or had begun to address 
his delinquent debts.6 
                                                          
3 Item 2. 
 
4  Item 2, 4, 5. 
 
5 Item 2, 4, 5. Only those debts alleged in the SOR will be considered for disqualifying purposes. All other 
matters not alleged may be considered when analyzing Applicant’s credibility; when considering the 
mitigating conditions; and in a whole-person analysis. 
 
6 Item 2.  
 
4 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty beginning in at least 2008 as a self-
employed handyman, where he experienced loss of income due to the poor economy at 
the time. The delinquent debts alleged are unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial problems in at least 2008 with a business 
downturn, which eventually prompted him to change employment in September 2010. 
Applicant has numerous debts that remain unresolved, including a large charged-off car 
loan debt. He has not provided proof that he has paid or resolved even the smallest 
debt in the SOR. His financial issues are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 The downturn of the economy, which resulted in the loss of business for 
Applicant, was a situation beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must show that he has acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
acknowledged on his SCA and in his Answer that all of the debts cited in the SOR were 
his responsibility.  Insufficient evidence was provided to show he has paid or resolved 
any of the alleged debts, even the smallest, or that he has successfully disputed any of 
them. AG¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant hss enrolled in a credit service or undertaken 
financial counseling. There is insufficient evidence to show that he has made a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors, or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. He did 
not provide sufficient evidence to show he disputed the legitimacy of any of the 
delinquent debts alleged, or provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of a 
dispute or evidence of actions to resolve the issues. Insufficient evidence was provided 
to apply AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old and had financial setbacks beginning in at least 2008.  
He has been aware that his finances were a security concern when he completed his 
SCA in 2015. He has been continuously employed by the federal contractor since 
September 2010, however, his largest debt, a vehicle loan, was charged-off as a bad 
debt in August 2014.  That charge off occurred almost four full years after he was 
employed by his current employer. Insufficient evidence was provided by Applicant to 
conclude his debts are paid or being resolved. He has not provided documented proof 
of any actions he may have taken to pay or resolve any of the debts. Although, I am 
sympathetic to his periods of underemployment due to a poor economy at the time, 
Applicant failed to show he is responsibly managing his finances. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
   
 
                                                   
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
