1 
-            
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 16-04040 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
       Statement of the Case 
On February 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on May 30, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on June 8, 2017, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided no response 
to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 6, is admitted 
into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 23, 2017.  
 
2 
 
 
 Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. She obtained a bachelor’s degree in 1991 and a 
master’s degree in 2005. Applicant has been employed as a quality engineer by a 
federal contractor since September 2000. She reported no military service and she was 
never married. Applicant reported a previous security clearance from 2007.  
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts including student loans in section 26 of her 
security clearance application (SCA).2 The total amount that she owed for the student 
loans was $57,541. She explained that she had been making automatic payments from 
her checking account to Sallie Mae in the amount of $250 per pay period. Then the 
amount increased to $331, and increased again to $481. “I neglected to increase the 
amount being paid from my checking account. I was injured requiring two surgeries . . . I 
was not able to obtain agreement with Sallie Mae that I thought I could manage.”3 
Applicant claims that she made three payments of $331 followed by two payments of 
$481. Unbeknownst to Applicant, the student loans were transferred to another creditor, 
TG, for collections. In June 2014, she received notification from her employer that her 
wages were being garnished to pay off her defaulted student loans. TG had been 
sending her letters that she never opened. Applicant produced no documentary 
evidence of her previous payments to Sallie Mae. 
 
In her September 2016 clearance interview, Applicant elaborated that she some -  
how injured her foot in 2011. While in recovery from that injury, she fell again and 
further injured her right leg, which was braced for the next six months. She had surgery 
in 2012, followed by 12 weeks of medical leave. She required a second surgery in June 
2013, followed by eight weeks of medical leave. She also suffered from adult-onset 
asthma. She had residual nerve damage and pain from the surgeries. She had reduced 
wages each time she was on medical leave or short-term disability. Applicant was 
overwhelmed and “unable to deal with everything.”4 She couldn’t keep up with her 
finances. She needed to make nine consecutive payments to TG on her delinquent 
student loans in order to have the garnishment order removed. In March 2015, she 
spoke to a bankruptcy attorney but decided not to file a petition.  
 
In her April 2017 Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that steps were being 
taken to resolve her delinquent debts. She provided no details or documentary evidence 
that she had even signed the agreement with TG to start the nine consecutive payments 
to have the garnishment order removed. Applicant stated that she had another minor 
surgery in January 2016, and more medical issues in 2017. She claims that SOR ¶¶ 1.f 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s April 27, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3) and Personal Subject Interview conducted on September 
15, 2016. (Item 4) 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 3, p. 24. 
 
4 Item 4, p. 6. 
 
3 
 
 
(medical debt), 1.h (Medicredit), and 1.j (medical debt) have been paid off. Applicant 
also claimed that she disputed the delinquencies at SOR¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, and 1.k as they 
were supposedly reported in error. However, she provided no substantiation for any of 
the aforementioned assertions. She has not reached out to her creditors and she has 
not had financial counseling. She provided no information about her current budget. She 
had taken no actions to resolve the specific financial issues in the SOR between her 
clearance interview in September 2016 and her Answer in April 2017.  
 
Applicant admitted 8 of the 11 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling 
$48,218. The delinquent student loans, which she admitted to, account for $37,298 of 
that amount. In her Answer, Applicant repeatedly stated “I admit this is a valid debt. 
Repayment options will be pursued as soon as my current medical obligations are met.” 
It is unclear when that will happen.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the former adjudicative guidelines (AGs) effective 
on September 1, 2006. However, new AGs were promulgated in Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017, and this decision 
is based on the new AGs.5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
5 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by her credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b) and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.6 Applicant has not met that burden. None of the delinquent debts have been 
adequately addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured medical problems resulting in multiple periods of short-term 
disability and reduced wages. Arguably, these conditions were beyond her control. She 
has produced no relevant or responsive documentation, either with her Answer to the 
SOR, or in response to the FORM. She has not demonstrated that she acted 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that her financial problems are under control, and that her debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit reports and SOR 
list 11 delinquent debts totaling $48,218. Applicant did not provide enough details with 
documentary corroboration about what she did to address her SOR debts. She did not 
provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as 
checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;7 (3) 
credible debt disputes indicating she did not believe she was responsible for the debts 
and why she held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment 
plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to 
resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because she did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was necessary to 
provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in the 
SOR. (FORM at 3) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that she paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. She did not describe financial counseling or provide 
a budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for her financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that she had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 2) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
7 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has gone through multiple 
surgeries and ongoing pain. She claims to have made some earlier efforts to pay her 
student loans. Most important, Applicant has not addressed the specific allegations in 
the SOR. She hasn’t met her burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
