                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  16-00781         
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:  Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his alcohol, personal conduct, and criminal
conduct problems concerning his alcohol-related arrests. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On September 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 1, 2016, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on March 15, 2017. He did not respond to the FORM.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guidelines G and E, Applicant allegedly (a) was arrested in June 2011, 
charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI), and placed on probation until 2017; (b)
was arrested in August 2014, charged with DUI and child endangerment, placed on
probation until 2020, and ordered to attend an alcohol education program for 18 months;
and (c) continued to consume alcohol while on probation for his 2011 DUI arrest. 
The 2011 DUI and continuing to consume alcohol while on probation charges
covered in Guideline G are included in the Guideline E allegations and incorporated by
reference. Both the 2011 and 2014 DUI charges are included in the Guideline J
allegations and incorporated by reference.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR
¶¶ 1.a-1.b, but neither admitted nor denied the allegations contained in SOR ¶ 1.c.
Addressing SOR allegations ¶ 2.a and ¶ 3.a, Applicant admitted the allegations with
explanations. He claimed he self-reported the DUI incidents after they occurred and was
very cooperative in helping file the incident reports with his security department. 
Addressing the two alcohol-related offenses covered in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b,
Applicant claimed the two self-reported DUI incidents reflect his ability to comply with
rules and regulations. He claimed (supported by signed attachments) that he was
assigned to a DUI medium risk supervision program. And he claimed he has regularly
attended self-help meetings between June 2010 and March 4, 2016 and Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) meetings between June 2015 and September 2015.
Applicant claimed in his response he is a retired Navy chief petty officer with over
22 years of honorable service and years of holding a security clearance throughout his
Navy career. He claimed he has not consumed any alcohol beverages of any kind for the
past 24 months and 25 days and still counting. And he claimed he has made the decision
to abstain from alcohol for the remainder of his life, claims that conflict to some extent
with his response to SOR ¶ 1.c. 
2
Find i n  g  s of Fact
Applicant is a 55 year-old electronics warfare technician who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in April 1981 and divorced in November 1994. (Items 6 and 9)
He remarried in November 1994 and has two adult children from his first marriage. (Items
6 and 9) He earned no post-high school diploma. He enlisted in the Navy in May 1984
and served 12 years of active duty. He received an honorable discharge in May 2006 with
the rank of chief petty officer. (Items 6 and 9)
Since August 2006, Applicant has been employed by his current employer. (Items
6-9) He reported unemployment between June 2006 and August 2006 following his Navy
discharge. (Items 6 and 9) 
Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents
Records document that Applicant was arrested in June 2011 and charged with
DUI. According to the statements Applicant provided his facility security officer (FSO) and
interviewing agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), respectively, he had
been out to a restaurant with his wife and consumed two beers and a soda drink. (Items
8-9)  After pulling out of the parking lot, he was stopped by a highway police officer for not
using his turn signal. The officer administered a Breathalyzer test on Applicant that
recorded a blood-alcohol content (BAC) level of .14 per cent, a finding seemingly at odds
with Applicant’s assurances of consuming no more than two beers (quantities not
identified) before exiting the restaurant. (Items 8-9) 
After administering a sobriety test on Applicant the investigating officer arrested 
Applicant and escorted him to a local police station. In court, Applicant pled guilty to DUI
(a general intent crime classified as a misdemeanor) through his appearing lawyer and
was ordered to complete a three-month first offender program for alcohol education. 
After competing the required first offender program classes in 2011, Applicant  was
ordered to complete a Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) course (which he did), 
fined $2,100, and placed on five years of probation until 2017. (Items 7-9) 
Because of inconsistencies in Applicant’s alcohol consumption explanations
preceding his exit from the restaurant he frequented prior to his 2011 incident, and other
inconsistences in his response about the extent of his alcohol consumption following his
2014 DUI incident. Without further explanations, Applicant’s abstention assurances
cannot be accepted at face value. To gain full acceptance, his OPM interview sobriety
claims required some corroboration from persons who have had close interaction with him
away from work. Neither his supervisor nor lawyer provided sufficient corroboration of
Applicant’s abstinence claims with their letters to fully substantiate his claims. And
3
because Applicant did not list his 2011 DUI offense in his Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), his disputed assurances of his promptly informing his
facility clearance officer (FSO) of his 2011 DUI incident cannot be afforded full weight and
remains an issue in dispute with the Government. 
In August 2014, Applicant consumed four beers while barbequing at his home. He
admitted to making a poor decision to pick up his grandson from school in the afternoon
of the same day. (Item 9) While driving home with his grandson in heavy traffic, he shifted
lanes and struck a stopped police officer on a motorcycle. Asked by the same officer
whether he had been drinking, Applicant admitted he had and was administered a
Breathalyzer test by the officer that registered a .12 BAC level. (Items 8-9) Applicant, in
turn, was arrested for DUI by the same investigating officer and  taken to a nearby police
station where he spent six hours in jail before he was released on bail. 
Appearing in court in December 2014, Applicant pled guilty to DUI and child
endangerment charges (both felonies). Both felonies were dropped by the court, which
fined Applicant to $850 (since paid off), ordered him to complete an 18-month alcohol
education program, and placed him on five years of probation until 2010. (Item 9) Both
the DUI and child endangerment charges remained in Applicant’s plea agreement and
were covered by the court’s probation order. (Items 7-8)
After completing the three meeting requirements of his 2014-ordered probation in
2015, Applicant’s probation status was reduced by the sentencing court to low risk
probation. (Items 3 and 9) He is credited with completing his ordered 18-month education
program. (Item 5) 
In the e-QIP Applicant completed in September 2015, he acknowledged prior
errors in judgment in driving his vehicle after consuming alcohol. In his e-QIP he attested 
to his maintaining his sobriety for almost 13 months and committed to never “taking
another drink in his life.” (Item 6) In his follow-up interview with an OPM agent, Applicant
assured the agent who interviewed him in December 2015 that he had not consumed any
alcohol since his August 2014 DUI incident and had no intention of resuming drinking in
the future. (Items 3 and 9) Applicant, however, is still on probation and declined to admit
or deny consuming alcohol while on probation. 
Applicant’s attached letters from his lawyer and program director of the multiple
offender DUI 18-month education program he completed in 2016 are certainly helpful.
They are not enough, however, to resolve questions about his past and post-2014
drinking status. For although the DUI program offers individual and group counseling for
court referrals, it provides no announced individual evaluations by licensed substance
abuse counselors as part of its core curriculum. Without more supporting evidence of his
alcohol consumption history (to include professional evaluations from substance abuse
specialists) and steps he is taking to avoid recurrent alcohol abuse (such as continuing
participation in alcoholics anonymous (AA) or comparable support groups if warranted),
his assured commitments to avoidance of recurrent alcohol incidents cannot be afforded
full weight.
4
Character references
Applicant is well-regarded by his direct supervisor who has known him for over 10
years and his attorney who represented him in the two DUI incidents. (Item 3) His
supervisor has never witnessed anything negative or irresponsible in his behavior. (Item
3) His supervisor expressed an enormous amount of confidence in Applicant, his
character, and his ability to make the right decisions. (Item 3) His supervisor credited
Applicant with being proactive in avoiding another alcohol-related incident and avoiding
alcohol consumption “in more than two years.” (Item 3) His supervisor’s observations are
credible as to how he observed Applicant in his work environment, but do not account for
any interactions he may have had with Applicant outside of his employment venue.
In his separate opinions of Applicant’s trustworthiness in light of his two alcohol-
related incidents in 2011 and 2014, his attorney who represented Applicant in both cases
vouched for Applicant’s being a responsible person without offering any observations
about whether Applicant continues to consume alcohol away from work, or whether an
alcohol evaluation would be helpful. (Item 3)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and any of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
5
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Alcohol Consumption
     The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise
of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  AG ¶ 21.
Personal Conduct
    The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, trustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  Of
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  AG, ¶ 15.
 
Criminal Conduct
     The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
AG ¶ 30
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
6
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately
or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  E. O. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s 2011 and 2014 alcohol-related
arrests and convictions and the absence of any corroborated alcohol consumption history
to gauge potential risks of recurrent alcohol abuse. By all accounts, Applicant is a highly
regarded  technician. Principal security issues raised in this case center on the recency of
Applicant’s two alcohol-related arrests. Since his 2014 DUI conviction and ordered
probation through 2020, he has satisfied all of the imposed probation conditions, but still
remains on probation until 2020, absent an earlier probation release by the supervising
court. 
While little is known about Applicant’s drinking history or whether he abused
alcohol at any time in his life before 2011, or during his periods of court-imposed
probation between 2011 and the present, his two alcohol-related incidents in 2011 and
2014, when considered together, are enough to raise concerns over the risk of his
engaging in recurrent alcohol-related offenses in the foreseeable future. On the strength
of the evidence presented, one disqualifying condition (DC) of the AGs for alcohol
consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from
work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing
the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
Because Applicant provided so little information about his alcohol history and steps
he has taken or is taking to mitigate alcohol recurrence risks, assessing recurrence risks
are difficult to gauge with the information available in the record.  Evaluation by a certified
substance abuse counselor and evidence of continued participation in AA-type support
groups in 2016 and 2017 (if warranted) could have been helpful in assessing Applicant’s
alcohol abuse risk levels but were not undertaken in any verifiable way. Until more is
7
known about Applicant’s drinking history and warranted continuing corrective initiatives,
the presence of extenuating circumstances and other mitigating factors cannot be reliably
evaluated.  
In most instances, convincing assurances of sustained abstinence over a number
of years (three and one-half years in Applicant’s case) might normally be enough to avoid
inferences and conclusions of drinking during an applicant’s probation. For even without
sufficient corroborating proof of sustained abstinence, potential abuse predictions,
generally, may not be based on supposition or suspicion. See ISCR Case No. 01-26893
(App. Bd. Oct. 2002); ISCR Case No. 97-0356 (App. Bd. April 1998). The Appeal Board
has consistently held that an unfavorable credibility determination concerning an applicant
is not a substitute for record evidence that the applicant used a substance (legal or
otherwise) since his last recorded use, or based on his past use is likely to resume usage
in the future. See ISCR Case No. 02-08032 (App. Bd. May 2004). 
In Applicant’s situation, however, he neither admitted nor denied continued
drinking during his probation in his response to the SOR. Applicant’s manifest avoidance
of any further incidents of alcohol abuse over the past three-plus years, while
encouraging, is not dispositive of recurrence risk avoidance absent more evidence of his
alcohol consumption history and, if warranted, evidence of a recent evaluation by a
certified substance abuse counselor or medical expert. Assessment of Applicant's
alcohol-related offenses must necessarily be made on the basis of a review of the entire
evidentiary record developed to date, not merely the information developed with respect
to his identified two relatively recent alcohol-related offenses. 
In making an overall assessment of Applicant's clearance eligibility, major
emphasis must be accorded his most recent drinking history, recent alcohol-related
incidents, professional evaluations if undertaken, recurrent alcohol-related problems in or
outside the work place over the past three-plus years, and the adequacy of the time
elapsed since his last abuse of alcohol (i.e., in August 2014). These considerations need
answering in the face of Applicant’s still limited track record of corrective steps to help him
avert alcohol-related incidents in the future and his continuing probation status covering
his 2014 alcohol-related incident. 
To be sure, Applicant’s manifest avoidance of any recurrent alcohol-related
incidents for over three years is encouraging. The alcohol-related incidents to which he
pled guilty to in 2011 and 2014, respectively, represent serious alcohol-related offenses,
however, for which his probation conditions remain in effect until 2020.  Evaluations and
follow-up counseling have not been initiated to date, and Applicant has not provided
probative evidence of his drinking history or identified any alcohol problems in need of
counseling. Without closure on his court-ordered probation under the circumstances
presented, recurrence risks cannot be fully and accurately ruled out. 
Under the facts of Applicant’s case, the evidence is not sufficiently developed to
warrant application of any of the mitigating conditions covered by Guideline G. Certainly,
professional evaluation and continued abstinence, if warranted, are important
considerations in determining what weight to assign to his reformed drinking claims. See
8
ISCR Case 02-03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006); ISCR Case 01-20579, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr.
14, 2004).  But his assurances of recurrence avoidance of alcohol abuse over a three-
plus-year period without more evidence of efforts to minimize recurrence risks are not
enough to absolve him of recurrence risks at this time.
Historically, the Appeal Board has emphasized the importance of a strong
rehabilitation program and a seasoned track record of alcohol resumption avoidance. See
ISCR Case No. 06-17541 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 (App. Bd.
Nov. 9, 2007); ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007). Despite
encouraging efforts to avoid alcohol altogether, his efforts to date are not enough to
absolve him of risks of recurrence of alcohol abuse under all of the circumstances
considered.
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse and incidents away
from work, corresponding insufficient development of probative evidence of a seasoned
track record of evaluation and seasoned avoidance of alcohol abuse, abstinence (both
with and without probation reporting requirements), Applicant’s continued probation
status, the applicable guidelines, and a whole-person assessment of his contributions to
the Navy and his employer, safe conclusions cannot yet be made that Applicant is free of
risks of potential recurrent alcohol abuse. 
Allegations covering Applicant’s two alcohol-related incidents in 2011 and 2014,
respectively, raise trustworthiness and judgment concerns under Guideline E and are fully
covered for the most part under Guideline G. To the extent Applicant’s inconsistent
statements about his pre-2011 incident consumption level and promptness about his
reporting the incident to his FSO raise separate trustworthiness concerns about his
candor, DC ¶ 16(e), personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign
intelligence entity or other individual or group” has some application (e.g., “(1) engaging in
activities which, if known, could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community
standing . . .”) has some application.
Applicable, too, to Applicant’s situation are DC ¶ 31(a) of the criminal conduct
guideline, “a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely to
affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast doubt on the
individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness,” DC ¶ 31(b), “evidence (including but
not limited to, a credible allegation, and admission, and matters of official record) of
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted,
or convicted,” and DC ¶ 31(c) “individual is currently on parole or probation.” Both of
Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses were adjudicated as misdemeanor offenses that
resulted in court-ordered probation conditions. 
9
While initial felony charges of child endangerment (related to Applicant having his
minor grandson in his vehicle at the time of the 2014 incident) were dismissed by the
court, Applicant’s actions were never denied and remain part of his administrative record.
Further, Applicant’s court-ordered probation relative to his 2014 offense is still in effect
and will remain so until 2020 absent relief from the supervising court. None of the
mitigating conditions covered by Guidelines E and J apply to Applicant’s situation. 
Considering all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s alcohol-
related offenses and the positive impressions he has forged with his employer,
Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses covered by Guidelines G, E, and J are not  mitigated.
Security concerns over Applicant’s risk of recurrent drinking are not resolved. 
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
   GUIDELINE G ( ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):     AGAINST APPLICANT
       Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                      Against Applicant  
  GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):      AGAINST APPLICANT
       Subparagraph 2.a:                                                Against Applicant       
                    
   GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL  CONDUCT):      AGAINST APPLICANT
        Subparagraph 3.a:                                              Against Applicant       
                    
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
10
11
