 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-00345 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foremen, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 1, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 9, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines G, E and 
F.1 (Item 1.) The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to 
the government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to 
sensitive personal information. 
 
 On October 5, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR (RSOR), and 
she requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 
2.)  On December 27, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In 
the FORM, Department Counsel offered seven documentary exhibits. (Items 1-7.) 
Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on February 12, 2017. Applicant 
submitted no additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge 
on October 1, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national 
security eligibility for access to sensitive personal information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 38 years old. She is divorced and has two children. Applicant is 
employed as an authorization referral coordinator, and she seeks access to sensitive 
information in connection with her current employment. (Items 2, 3.) 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption  
 
 The SOR lists three allegations (1.a. through 1.c.) regarding alcohol 
consumption, under Adjudicative Guideline G. The allegations will be discussed below 
in the order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
1.a. The SOR alleges that in September 2013, Applicant was held in jail 
overnight after drinking and driving. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this allegation in her 
RSOR, but she wrote she was held for failure to yield, not DUI. (Item 2.)  
 
1.b. The SOR alleges that in November 2004, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI) Liquor/Drugs/Vapors/Combo, DUI with a 
blood alcohol contents of .08 or more and Extreme DUI - BAC of .15 or more. (Item 1.) 
Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote that she was not the 
person driving the vehicle, and the case was dismissed. (Item 2.)  
 
1.c. The SOR alleges that in July 1999 Applicant was arrested and charged with 
DUI. (Item 1.)  Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, and she admitted that 
she was found guilty of DUI and she did pay a fine and served 24 hours in jail. (Item 2.)  
 
Applicant wrote in her RSOR that she has refrained from alcohol use due to a 
pineal cyst in her brain that was diagnosed in 2015. (Item 2.)  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The SOR lists seven allegations (2.a. through 2.g.) regarding Personal Conduct, 
under Adjudicative Guideline E. The allegations will be discussed below in the order 
they were listed on the SOR: 
 
 
3 
 
2.a. The SOR alleges that the information set forth in subparagraphs 1.a. through 
1.c., above constitutes Personal Conduct concerns.  
 
2.b. The SOR alleges that in about July 2015, Applicant was terminated from her 
employment. (Item 1.) Applicant denied this allegation in her RSOR, contending that 
she left her employment by mutual agreement. (Item 2.) This issue was ultimately 
mediated, and Applicant's separation was allowed to be listed as by Mutual agreement. 
(Items 2. 3.) 
 
2.c. The SOR alleges that in about November 2013, Applicant was terminated 
from her employment. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, writing 
she was terminated for not being able to understand the job as quickly as her supervisor 
wanted. (Item 2.)  
 
2.d. The SOR alleges that in about September 2013, Applicant left her 
employment after unsatisfactory performance. Applicant admitted this allegation in her 
RSOR, and she wrote that she was terminated because she failed to appear for work on 
the day she was stopped and held in jail overnight, as alleged in 1.a., above. (Item 2.)  
 
2.e. The SOR alleges that in about March 2012, Applicant was terminated from 
her employment. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, and she 
wrote she was terminated because she did not answer a phone call while she was 
drawing blood. (Item 2.)  
 
2.f. The SOR alleges that in about 2009, Applicant was terminated from her 
employment. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote 
that she had left her training class to call her supervisor for a medical emergency, and 
she was terminated for leaving the class. (Item 2.)  
 
2.g. The SOR alleges that in about September 2009, Applicant was terminated 
from her employment. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, and she 
wrote that while she was on leave for bereavement, she was terminated. (Item 1.)  
 
Applicant wrote in her RSOR that she has never compromised patient safety nor 
used any patient information for personal gain.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists eight allegations (1.a. through 1.h.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the debts were 
established by credit reports submitted in evidence. (Items 6 and 7.) All of the SOR 
allegations will be discussed below in the order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
3.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $2,910. (Item 1.) Applicant denied this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that she was 
disputing the debt for an apartment rent, and she was told she did not owe this debt 
 
4 
 
(Item 2.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has 
been resolved or reduced. 
 
3.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,536. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, but claimed it had been 
paid through garnishment. Applicant attached her employment leave and earning 
statement which shows that this debt was resolved through garnishment. (Item 2.) 
   
3.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $1,382. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, but claimed that 
she and her ex-husband were each ordered to pay 50% of their children’s medical bills. 
A copy of their divorce decree was submitted confirming this order. (Item 2.) No 
independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved 
or reduced by Applicant or her ex-husband. 
   
3.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $275. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, but claimed that 
this was also a medical bill of her children and she and her ex-husband were each 
ordered to pay 50%. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been introduced to 
establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced by Applicant or her ex-husband. 
         
3.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $109. (Item 1.) Applicant denied this debt in her RSOR. She wrote that this was due 
to an insurance charge, and she has not been able to communicate with the creditor. 
(Item 2.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has 
been resolved or reduced. 
 
3.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $103. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, but claimed that 
this was also a medical bill of her children and she and her ex-husband were each 
ordered to pay 50%. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been introduced to 
establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced by Applicant or her ex-husband. 
  
 3.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $86. (Item 1.) Applicant denied this debt in her RSOR. She wrote she was informed 
by the creditor that she did not owe this debt, and she was awaiting documentation to 
establish that this debt was resolved. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
3.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $57. (Item 1.) Applicant denied this debt in her RSOR. She wrote she was informed 
by the creditor that she did not owe this debt, and she was awaiting documentation to 
establish that this debt was resolved. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
Applicant wrote in her RSOR that her financial problems occurred because she is 
a single mother raising two children, and for almost three years she did not receive child 
 
5 
 
support. She averred that she is working on resolving her delinquent debts. No 
evidence was introduced to establish that Applicant will be able to satisfy all of her 
delinquent debts or that she is current with all of her present debts.  
 
Policies 
 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense Security Service and 
Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment of the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. After reviewing Applicant's three alcohol related incidents, I find that the 
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying condition (a) in this case.   
 
(a) alcohol related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of the 
frequency of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has 
been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23. Because of the lack of any independent 
evidence about Applicant's current alcohol consumption, I cannot find that any of the 
mitigating factors are applicable in this case, and I find against Applicant under 
Guideline G.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. Because of Applicant's three alcohol-related incidents, and her extensive, 
troubling employment history, I find that the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying 
conditions (c) and (d), in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
7 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
 
8 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 listed below:   
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 
9 
 
 Because of Applicant's history and the recency of her conduct, I did not find that 
any of the mitigating factors are applicable in this case, and I find against Applicant 
under Guideline E.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Because Applicant has had delinquent debts for several years, I find that the 
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) as applicable in this 
case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
 
10 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 While Applicant's divorce was a contributing factor in her financial difficulties, no 
evidence was introduced to establish that Applicant has been responsible in resolving or 
reducing the majority of the delinquent debts, nor that she can be financially responsible 
 
11 
 
in the future. Therefore, I do not find that any of the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20 are 
applicable in this case, and I find against Applicant under Guideline F. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
personal information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G, E, and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Alcohol Consumption, Personal Conduct, and 
Financial Considerations security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b.:    For Applicant 
 
12 
 
Subparagraph 2.c.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.g.:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.d.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.e.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.f.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.g.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.h.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a sensitive position. Eligibility for access to sensitive personal information is denied. 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
