 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-00664 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2012. Since then, he has not acted 
responsibly in addressing his debts. Applicant failed to provide information sufficient to 
mitigate the resulting security concerns about his finances. Accordingly, his request for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On December 30, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
 
 On May 23, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial considerations 
(Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer), provided a supporting 
document, and requested a hearing. I received the case on March 21, 2017, and I 
convened the requested hearing on June 14, 2017. Department Counsel proffered three 
items identified as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 3, which I admitted without objection.3 
Applicant testified in his own behalf and did not present any additional documents. I 
received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 23, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $52,794 for four 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.d). In response to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted all of the SOR allegations, and he provided information showing the debt at 
SOR 1.d was satisfied in June 2016. (Answer; Tr. 10 - 12) In addition to the facts thus 
established, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and works as an information technology (IT) specialist 
executive for a defense contractor. He has held that position since September 2014. He 
has worked in IT for several different employers since early 2013. Applicant served in 
the United States Marine Corps from December 1991 until December 2011. He worked 
as a communications specialist, and he retired after 20 years of honorable service as a 
gunnery sergeant. Applicant was trained as a communications specialist and has held a 
security clearance since the beginning of his military career. While on active duty, 
Applicant deployed to Iraq between August 2005 and April 2006, and between July 
2007 and February 2008. (Gx. 1; Tr. 6, 25 – 28) 
 
 Applicant did not want to retire when he did. He lost control over his decision of 
when to retire because of the combination of a disciplinary reduction in rank and 
physical problems that prevented him from passing annual fitness testing. He had about 
six months advance notice of his retirement date. (Gx. 1; Tr. 25, 45 – 46) 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 A copy of Department Counsel’s “discovery letter” and a list of the Government’s exhibits also are 
included as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I and II, respectively. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married since July 2003. Together, they have 
two children, ages 18 and 14. Applicant also has three other children from before or 
outside his marriage. They range in age from 8 to 22. Applicant pays child support to 
the mother of his 8-year-old child. (Tr. 37 – 42) 
 
 Applicant’s wife owns outright a house she purchased in 1993 in State A. In 
2005, Applicant co-signed with his wife a $30,000 cash-out refinance of that house. 
They used the money to pay off his wife’s debts. His wife lived there for about six 
months in 2005 before joining Applicant when he transferred to a new duty station in 
State B. She then rented out the house. In 2007, Applicant moved his family to State C 
for his next duty assignment. However, Applicant and his wife separated in 2008 and 
she returned to her house in State A. Applicant provided her with financial support until 
2011, when she and their children moved back in with Applicant in State C. The State A 
house has remained empty since 2011. The debt at SOR 1.a represents the unpaid 
mortgage for the State A house. (Tr. 20 – 24, 29, 55 – 64) 
 
 Applicant avers his wife grossly neglected their financial obligations during his 
second deployment to Iraq. When she and the children moved back in with him in 2011, 
they agreed to stay together until their youngest child, now age 14, graduates from high 
school. At that time, Applicant and his wife will divorce. Applicant views the house in 
State A as solely his wife’s obligation. He has only contacted the lender three times 
since 2011 about how to resolve that delinquency, for which he acknowledges his joint 
liability. Applicant claims the lender will not deal with him because he is “not the 
primary” borrower. The debt at SOR 1.a remains unresolved. (Tr. 22 – 23, 25, 32 – 34, 
64 – 65) 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR 1.d was a delinquent credit card account that became 
the subject of a civil judgment against Applicant. In response, he made monthly 
payments to the clerk’s office at the courthouse where the judgment was entered. He 
paid off the debt in 2016. (Answer; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 42) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.c is for a delinquent credit card. Applicant has not acted to 
resolve that debt. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 40) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.b represents the remainder after resale of a trailer Applicant 
purchased in 2005. The seller repossessed it in 2012 and Applicant has not resolved 
the debt because the creditor will not agree to a repayment plan. Applicant disagrees 
with the amount listed in the credit reports. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 34 – 36) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to a combination of his wife’s inability 
or unwillingness to help manage their finances, and to the loss of income he 
experienced when he left the military. His income on active duty was about $6,000 a 
month. After he left, his retired pay was about $2,000 and, after a few months of 
unemployment, his first job paid only about $1,900 monthly. Combined with ongoing 
child support obligations, Applicant struggled to make ends meet. He is current in his 
 
 
4 
 
 
child support payments, on the mortgage for his house in State C, his taxes, and his 
other regular financial obligations. Applicant has little in the way of savings and 
generally lives paycheck to paycheck. He has not consulted with a financial counselor 
since sometime in 2007, and he did not present any information regarding a budget or a 
cogent plan for resolving his remaining debts. (Tr. 23, 43 – 54)  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6  
 
 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
5 
 
 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of 
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern appears at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts 
regardless of the ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). Available information documented the SOR allegations that Applicant owes 
a significant level of past-due or delinquent debt. The same information shows Applicant 
has willfully neglected his debts absent some form of enforcement, such as the civil 
judgment for the debt at SOR 1.d. As of the hearing, Applicant had not constructively 
addressed his remaining debts, and he did not present information that shows he is 
likely to do so in the near future. 
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
                                                 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s debts are recent and 
ongoing. Applicant did not expect to retire when he did, but he had sufficient time to 
address his post-retirement employment options or to adjust his personal finances in the 
face of a pending loss of income. Even were his retirement a wholly unexpected event, 
Applicant has not demonstrated he acted reasonably in response to those 
circumstances over the next five years. The only debt payments he has made involved 
a necessary response to a civil judgment against him. Otherwise, it is likely he would 
not have paid that debt. Finally, Applicant has not sought any professional financial 
counseling or other assistance since 2011, when his financial problems started. On 
balance, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s 
information. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). I am mindful of Applicant’s 20 years of honorable military service. 
Nonetheless, his lack of action to pay or otherwise resolve his debts over the six years 
that have passed since he retired serve only to reinforce the doubts about his suitability 
for access to classified information raised by his financial problems. Because protection 
of the interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, any 
remaining doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
