 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03668 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 17, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On February 22, 2016; and August 17, 2007, Applicant submitted a security 
clearance application (SF-86). (Government Exhibits 2 and 3.)  On January 6, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2017. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
May 15, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 7 Items, were 
received by Applicant on June 5, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 7 are admitted 
into evidence, and going forward are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 7.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 63 years old. He is married and has three grown children.  He has a 
Bachelor’s degree. He is employed with a defense contractor as an Engineer.  He is 
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified one debt totaling approximately $63,000.  Applicant admits allegations 1.a., 
and 1.d., set forth in the SOR. He denies 1.b., and 1.c.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  
Applicant has been working for his current employer since 2015. 
 
 Applicant accumulated over $63,000 in debt that he did not list on his security 
clearance application dated February 22, 2016.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  There is no 
explanation as to how he became indebted.     
  
 Credit Reports of the Applicant dated November 7, 2007; March 4, 2016; and 
May 2, 2017, indicate that he is indebted to each of the creditors listed in the SOR.  
(Government Exhibits 5, 6, and 7.) 
 
 1.a.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $63,004.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
paid. 
 
3 
 
 
 1.b.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent medical account in the 
approximate amount of $731.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
paid.   
 
 1.c.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent medial account that was 
placed for collection in the amount of $110.  There is no evidence to show that the debt 
has been paid. 
 
 1.d.  Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in 2001.  The bankruptcy was 
dismissed in May 2002.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), Standard Form 86 dated February 22, 2016.  Section 26 asked about his 
Financial Record, specifically, whether in the past 7 years, has he had bills or debts 
turned over the a collection agency; or has he had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?  Applicant responded, 
“NO,” to both questions.  These were false answers.  Applicant failed to list the 
delinquent debts set forth above in subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.  (Government 
Exhibit 3.)   
   
 Applicant’s answer gives conflicting reasons why he did not answer the questions 
truthfully.  He states that he did not read the question carefully before answering the 
question.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  He also states that when he completed the 
electronic security clearance application, the computer system did not retain the data he 
had saved.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Which is it?  Is it because he did not read the 
question carefully.  This is probably more likely.  If he incurred technical problems, he 
did not address the situation responsibly.   He states that he had to input the data 
several times.  He states that at some point, he became frustrated with the technical 
problems.  He further states that he complained to someone about the problem he was 
having.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)    
 
 The record is void of mitigation here.  Applicant has failed to provide any 
information concerning his current financial state.  There are no letters of 
recommendation from anyone attesting to his character, nor are there performance 
reviews demonstrating the level or competence of his work product.  Furthermore, there 
is nothing from his security department corroborating his testimony regarding technical 
problems he allegedly incurred while completing the security clearance application. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is delinquently indebted in the approximate amount of $63,000.  The 
record is void as to any mitigation. Applicant’s actions demonstrate both a history of and 
inability or a unwillingness to satisfy his debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  Applicant provided no information concerning his financial affairs that 
demonstrate appropriate mitigation.  There is no information showing that he has done 
anything to resolve his debts or why he filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in 2001, and 
why it was dismissed in 2002.  It can be assumed that all the debts remain owing.  
Given these circumstances, there is no evidence that he has acted reasonably and 
responsibly.  His actions demonstrate unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor 
judgment. 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant deliberately falsified his security clearance application in response to 
the question regarding his finances.  He did not answer the question truthfully. If he 
indeed had technical problems while answering the electronic security clearance 
questionnaire, he should have stopped and brought this to the attention of his security 
department.  No matter what the obstacle, he should have taken the required time to 
answer the questions correctly.  To knowingly submit erroneous answers on this 
important document is equally as irresponsible as intentionally submitting false answers.  
If Applicant had some problem completing the application correctly, he should have 
taken reasonable measures to document this problem at that time.  Applicant did not 
 
7 
 
document anything about this technical problem.  If he actually incurred technical 
difficulties, the fact that he did not mention the issue until he answered the SOR, shows 
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness.  There are no applicable conditions 
that could be mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national security 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
_______________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
