 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03561 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). Applicant responded to the SOR on January 4, 
2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on June 5, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for July 19, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 26, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing ¶ 2.a. There was no 
objection. 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant both requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about India. Neither party objected, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the requests. The facts are summarized in 
the written requests and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note 
is that India is the world’s largest democracy, works closely with the United States on 
many matters, shares common strategic interests, and generally respects the rights of 
its citizens. But it also continues to have human rights problems; it has been victimized 
by terrorist attacks; and restricted, dual-use technology has been illegally exported to 
India. India does not permit its citizens to hold dual nationality. An Indian citizen who 
becomes a citizen of another country forfeits his or her Indian citizenship. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old consultant working on a defense contract. He was born 
in India. He has bachelor’s and master’s degrees, which were awarded in India. He also 
has a master’s degree from a U.S. university. He is married with a minor child.1 
  
 Applicant became fascinated with the United States while in graduate school in 
India. He came to the United States in 1996 to pursue additional education. He grew to 
love the United States and everything it offered. He remained as a permanent resident. 
His wife is also from India. Applicant and his wife became U.S. citizens in 2010. Their 
child was born in the United States.2 
 
 Applicant’s parents and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of India. His 
parents are retired. His father was a banker, and his mother was a college professor. 
His father-in-law is retired. His mother-in-law did not work outside the home. His sister is 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A, B, H. 
 
2 Tr. at 19, 39-40, 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A, C, H. 
 
 
3 
 
an Indian citizen living and working in the United States. None of Applicant’s family 
members have any direct connection to the Indian government.3 
 
 Applicant bought a plot of undeveloped land in India in 2003. He estimates the 
value of the property at $25,000 to $30,000. He recently sold the property to his father. 
His mother gave interest in another plot of land worth about $25,000 to Applicant’s wife 
as a gift. Applicant’s mother and wife own the property jointly, with his wife having right 
of survivorship.4 
 
 Applicant’s father opened two joint accounts in India, one with Applicant and one 
with Applicant’s sister. Applicant’s father opened the accounts so that he can share his 
assets with his children when he gets older. He controls the accounts. Applicant 
deposited some funds in the account before he became a permanent resident, but the 
majority of the funds were deposited by his father. Applicant had other bank accounts in 
India. He transferred $47,900 to the United States, but he left the equivalent of less than 
$500 in an account to use when he and his wife visit India.5 
 
 Applicant’s annual income is between $275,000 and $300,000. His wife is also 
well-educated with a good job earning about $100,000 per year. They own their home 
and have an investment property. Their net worth in the United States is more than $1 
million.6 
 
 Applicant and his wife lost their Indian citizenships when they became U.S. 
citizens. He has no plan to move back to India. He regularly votes in U.S. elections and 
is active in his community. He expressed his undivided love for the United States, which 
he considers his home.7 
 
Applicant called a witness and submitted numerous documents and letters 
attesting to his excellent job performance. He is praised for his dedication, honesty, 
patriotism, sincerity, work ethic, professionalism, altruism, maturity, and integrity.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 28-29, 32, 34-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 26-27, 30-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A, L. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A, M. 
 
6 Tr. at 19-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, F, H. 
 
7 Tr. at 16-17, 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, H. 
 
8 Tr. at 13-17; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE H. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant has family members, including in-laws, who are citizens and residents 
of India. He has assets in India. India is the world’s largest democracy, works closely 
with the United States on many matters, shares common strategic interests, and 
generally respects the rights of its citizens. But it also continues to have human rights 
problems; it has been victimized by terrorist attacks; and restricted, dual-use technology 
has been illegally exported to India. Applicant’s foreign contacts and financial interests 
 
6 
 
create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his wife. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e), and 7(f) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to India. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.9  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen. His wife and child live in the United States, but 
he still has family in India, including his parents and parents-in-law. None of his family 
members have any direct connection to the Indian government. Applicant and his wife 
gave up their Indian citizenships when they became U.S. citizens. He has no plan to 
move back to India. He regularly votes in U.S. elections and is active in his community. 
He expressed his undivided love for the United States, which he considers his home. 
People who know him attested to his patriotism. 
I find that Applicant’s ties to India are outweighed by his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. His closest family, life, home, majority of 
assets, and professional career are in the United States. I find that it is unlikely he will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United States 
and the interests of India. There is no conflict of interest, because he can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are 
applicable.  
Applicant sold or transferred most of his assets in India. The remaining assets in 
India are small in comparison with his U.S. assets, and could not be used effectively to 
influence, manipulate, or pressure him. AG ¶ 8(f) is applicable. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s credible 
testimony and strong character evidence. 
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude foreign influence 
security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
