 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )       ISCR Case: 16-01685  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 21, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $103,000 in delinquent debts, including state and 
Federal tax debts, which he has not repaid or otherwise resolved. He also has not filed 
his Federal tax returns for ten out of the last eleven years. Applicant did not show that his 
financial difficulties are under control. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 9, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On October 12, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2016, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). 
(Item 1.) On January 18, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on January 19, 2017, and received by him on April 25, 2017. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any 
objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-
day period he was afforded. Items 1 through 5 are entered into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He is not married, but has a son. Applicant has worked 
overseas for various defense contractors several times over the past few years. (Item 2.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with some explanations. 
(Item 1.) The debts are documented in credit bureau reports in the record dated 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
September 15, 2015; and April 26, 2016. (Items 3, and 4.) They are also documented in 
other admissible evidence. (Item 5.) The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt to a creditor in the amount of $4,535 
for telephone services. No information was provided that this debt has been paid or 
reduced. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt to a creditor in the amount of $1,901. 
In his Answer Applicant stated that he, “Need[ed] to return equipment.” No information 
was provided that this debt has been paid or reduced. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) at least 
$47,870 in unpaid back taxes. A tax lien was filed against Applicant in 2013 concerning 
this debt. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Items 3, and 5 
at 8.) 
  
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt to a creditor in the amount of $1,254 
for telephone services. No information was provided that this debt has been paid or 
reduced. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt to a creditor in the amount of $829. 
In his Answer Applicant stated that he, “Need[ed] to return equipment.” No information 
was provided that this debt has been paid or reduced. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt to a creditor in the amount of $122 
for insurance services. No information was provided that this debt has been paid or 
reduced. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.g.  Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt to a creditor in the amount of $79 
for insurance services. No information was provided that this debt has been paid or 
reduced. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted that he had not filed his Federal tax returns for tax years 
2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2014, and 2015. He did file a return for 
tax year 2012. In an interview with a Government investigator on November 9, 2015, 
Applicant stated that during the tax years 2006, 2008, 2009, and 2011 he was working 
overseas and did not have his tax paperwork forwarded to him. The report also says, 
“Since returning to the states permanently in 12/12, he has not filed due to being scared 
since he hasn’t filed for so long.” Applicant further indicated that he would contact the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to find out how to become current on his taxes. No further 
information was provided to show that Applicant has filed any of his tax returns. This 
allegation is not resolved. (Item 5 at 8, 11-32.) 
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted not filing his required state tax returns for all the tax years 
between 2005 and 2015. No further information was submitted to show that Applicant has 
 
 
4 
 
 
filed the required tax returns, or was not required to file them. This allegation is not 
resolved. (Item 2 at Section 26.) 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing $47,000 in unpaid state taxes. He stated in his 
interview that this figure was an estimate. No further information was provided. This debt 
is not resolved. (Item 5 at 8.) 
 
     Applicant admitted in his interview that his current financial situation is “poor.” 
Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit counseling 
or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. (Item 5 at 9.) 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has a considerable number of past-due debts, including tax debts, that 
he cannot, or will not, resolve. He also failed to file up to ten years of Federal and various 
state tax returns. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant continues to owe past-due commercial and tax debt in the amount of 
approximately $103,000. He offered no reasonable basis to conclude that such problems 
will not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant did not claim that any unusual circumstances were responsible for his 
inability to pay his debts, or file his tax returns. Mitigation was not established under AG 
¶ 20(b).  
 
No evidence of financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Further, there are 
no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Accordingly, 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions 
of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Finally, Applicant did not claim, or supply any documentation to show, that he has 
filed any of his past-due tax returns. Nor did he submit any evidence to show that he has 
entered into a payment arrangement with the IRS or any state taxing authority, and is in 
compliance with such arrangements. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not mitigate his tax or delinquent debt issues. Guideline F is found 
against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to owe more 
than $100,000 in bad debts and back taxes, and did not show any plan for resolving that 
substantial indebtedness. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains 
undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
