 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-00623  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant committed four alcohol-related criminal offenses from 2005 to 2014, the 
most recent of which resulted in conviction for Driving Under the Influence. He was 
diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent, but failed to complete the prescribed treatment 
program and resumed regular alcohol consumption. Resulting security concerns were 
not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 20, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On July 18, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2016, and September 21, 2016, and 
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. (Item 1.) On October 5, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant on October 6, 2016, and received by him 
on October 11, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to 
the FORM, did not file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time 
to respond beyond the 30-day period he was afforded. Items 1 through 5 are admitted in 
evidence. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of 
SEAD 4. I considered the 2006 adjudicative guidelines, as well as the SEAD 4 AG, in 
determining Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, but this decision is issued pursuant to the SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 30 years old, has never married, and has no children. He is a high 
school graduate and has taken some college classes. He has held his present 
employment as a technician with a defense contractor since March 2013; and is seeking 
to renew his security clearance in connection with that position. He was honorably 
discharged in paygrade E-5 after serving in the Navy from 2006 to 2012, and held a 
security clearance during that enlistment. (Item 2; Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, with some explanations. 
(Item 1.) His admissions are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant was arrested for, and charged with, Minor in Possession of Alcohol on 
January 27, 2005.2 He was 18 years old, and drank five beers while attending a concert 
with a friend. He was subsequently fined and ordered to serve 50 hours of community 
service. (Item 1; Item 3; Item 5.)  
 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
2 The SOR incorrectly listed the date of this offense as, “January 2006.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 While serving in the Navy, Applicant was awarded non-judicial punishment in 
March 2008, and again in August 2009, for alcohol-related violations of the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice. The first offense was for underage drinking (he was 20 years 
old at the time), and the second offense was for failing to report for duty after drinking 
heavily the previous night and sleeping through his alarm clock. As a result of these 
offenses he was restricted to his ship, ordered to perform extra duties and, for the 
second offense, reduced in rank. (Item 2; Item 3.)  
 
 On April 10, 2014, Applicant was arrested for, and charged with, Driving Under 
the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs (DUI), a second degree misdemeanor. On September 
30, 2014, he was convicted of that offense and sentenced to pay a $500 fine and $556 
in court costs, to complete two alcohol education programs, and to perform community 
service. In his August 2016 answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed (without providing 
corroboration) that he had paid this fine, and admitted that he had not completed the 
remaining court-ordered requirements under this sentence. Applicant formerly, but no 
longer, resides in the state where this DUI arrest and conviction occurred. (Item 1; Item 
2; Item 3; Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he voluntarily entered and participated in a counseling 
program for treatment of his diagnosed Alcohol Dependence from September through 
December 2014. He failed to complete the program, which he left about half way 
through because he felt that he had himself under control and was comfortable with 
what he had learned. Applicant said that he continues to consume alcohol “in 
moderation at home [which] does not exceed 15 drinks/week.” (Item 1; Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence concerning the level of responsibility his duties 
entail in his defense contractor work, or his track record with respect to handling 
sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate 
his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case 
decided without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
 
 
4 
 
 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder;  
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
Applicant committed, and was punished for, increasingly serious alcohol-related 
criminal incidents in 2005, 2008, 2009, and 2014. In 2014 he was diagnosed as Alcohol 
Dependent3 while participating in an alcohol counseling treatment program that he failed 
to complete. He failed to follow the court order to complete two alcohol education 
programs after his 2014 DUI. He continues regular alcohol consumption notwithstanding 
his diagnosis and treatment for Alcohol Dependence.4 These facts support security 
concerns under the disqualifying conditions cited above. 
 
AG ¶ 23 describes two conditions could provide mitigation of the security 
concerns in this case, considering that Applicant admittedly is not participating in, and 
has not successfully completed, an alcohol counseling or treatment program: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established a pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
  
                                                 
3 Alcohol Dependence was the terminology used at the time to describe one type of what is now called an 
alcohol use disorder. 
4 The record does not support independent security concerns under AG ¶ 20(f) because there is no direct 
evidence that Applicant’s treatment recommendations included abstention from alcohol. His failure to 
comply with and complete the counseling program he entered in 2014 is addressed under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Appellant’s pattern of increasingly serious alcohol-related misconduct spanned 
more than nine years, and he cited no unusual circumstances that would suggest 
recurrence is unlikely. The most recent offense was his DUI in 2014, only ten months 
before he submitted his e-QIP, and his continued regular consumption of up to 15 drinks 
per week after being diagnosed Alcohol Dependent casts continuing doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. He failed to demonstrate a clear and 
established pattern of responsible compliance with treatment recommendations 
concerning his alcohol use. Accordingly, mitigation of security concerns under this 
guideline was not established under AG ¶¶ 23 (a) or (b). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 16 contains no disqualifying conditions that would support 
security concerns in this case that are independent of those comprehensively 
addressed under Guideline G and Guideline J. The SOR merely alleges, by reference to 
the Guideline G allegations, Applicant’s four alcohol-related crimes and his continued 
alcohol consumption. While any conduct involving questionable judgment or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can theoretically fall under Guideline 
E, as well as other guidelines, no value is added to the evaluation of Applicant’s national 
security eligibility by doing so in this case.   
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 31 contains five disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two of those conditions were established by 
the evidence in this record:5 
                                                 
5 Applicant admitted that he failed to complete court-ordered alcohol education classes after his DUI 
conviction, which was addressed above under AG ¶ 22(g). There is insufficient record evidence to 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Appellant’s multiple alcohol-related criminal offenses occurred between 2005 and 
2014. Several of them would be considered minor standing alone. Taken together, 
however, they cast significant doubt on Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness, particularly considering the pattern’s duration and increasing severity. 
His 2014 DUI conviction is both recent and serious, and would independently support 
security concerns under this guideline.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 32 contains four conditions that could mitigate criminal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
As discussed above under Guideline G, Appellant’s pattern of criminal 
misconduct is lengthy, recent, and casts continuing doubt on his reliability and 
judgment. His failure to complete the 2014 alcohol counseling program and court-
ordered requirements following his DUI conviction preclude a finding of successful 
rehabilitation in the absence of other evidence. Applicant admitted all of the offenses 
alleged in the SOR, and offered no evidence that he was pressured to commit them. 
The evidence does not mitigate security concerns under any of the foregoing conditions. 
                                                                                                                                                             
establish that these classes qualify as a “court-ordered rehabilitation program,” or that the counseling 
program he failed to complete was court-ordered. Accordingly, AG ¶ 32(d) concerns were not established. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues regular alcohol consumption despite 
increasingly severe criminal punishments for a pattern of alcohol-related offenses 
spanning more than nine years and a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence. He failed to 
complete an alcohol counseling program and other court-ordered requirements after his 
2014 DUI conviction. The likelihood of recurrence and potential for pressure, 
exploitation, or duress are substantial. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as 
to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Alcohol 
Consumption and Criminal Conduct guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT (Duplicative)6 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant (Duplicative) 
  
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
6 Paragraph 2 is duplicative of Paragraphs 1 and 3. It supports no separate findings of security concern.  
 
