 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-02274 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
past financial issues. He began experiencing financial trouble shortly after he and his wife 
of 28 years divorced. He started taking action to address his past-due debts several years 
ago. He presented substantial documentation showing that he has resolved the majority 
of the debts that he incurred following the divorce. His present financial situation does not 
raise a concern about his security clearance eligibility. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 By agreement of the parties, a hearing was convened on November 16, 2017. 
Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the record 
without objection.1 The transcript was received on November 27, 2017.  
 
  
                                                          
1 Government’s Exhibits 1 – 5.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 52, holds a master’s degree and served in the U.S. military for over 25 
years. He had direct access to highly sensitive U.S. information while in the military. He 
closely guarded the information. He retired from the military in 2010, and since then has 
worked as a federal contractor. He was unemployed from January 2015 to April 2015, 
and was then hired by his current employer. He submitted a security clearance application 
in 2015 in connection with his current job. He reported a number of financial problems on 
the application, including the foreclosure of his home. Applicant’s financial problems 
started shortly after he and his wife of 28 years divorced.2  
 
Applicant addressed and resolved the majority of the debts that he incurred 
following his divorce. He presented documentation showing that he resolved the debts 
referenced in SOR 1.a through 1.c, totaling approximately $650,000. He also presented 
documentation and other credible evidence showing that he paid or is paying other debts 
not listed on the SOR that he incurred after the divorce, including about $50,000 in credit 
card debt. The only SOR debt that Applicant has yet to address is the $700 account 
referenced in SOR 1.d. This debt is not listed on Applicant’s 2016 or 2017 credit reports. 
Applicant pays his current financial obligations in a timely manner and, though not perfect, 
his current financial situation is good.3  
 
Applicant and his ex-wife married in 1989, and they have three children. They 
purchased their first home in 1993, and never missed or were late with their mortgage 
payments. They sold the home in 2002 and used the sale proceeds as a down payment 
for their second home, which they bought for $360,000.4 
 
Applicant and his ex-wife separated in 2006. Applicant wanted to keep the home 
to provide some stability for his then young children. His wife, on the other hand, wanted 
to sell the home and split the proceeds. At the time, Applicant’s children were between 
the ages of 11 and 17. His only source of income was his active duty military pay. He was 
an E-7. He applied for and was approved by a major U.S. bank for a mortgage totaling 
over $550,000, which would allow him to buy out his wife and keep the home. He gave 
his wife approximately $100,000, and the divorce was finalized in 2007.  
 
Applicant was awarded custody of the children. Although Applicant and his wife 
remain friendly, he never received child support from her. Applicant’s youngest child is 
currently serving in the U.S. military, while his oldest two children graduated college and 
are pursuing professional careers.5 
 
About a year after the divorce, Applicant started experiencing financial trouble. The 
mortgage he agreed to in order to keep the home was an adjustable rate instrument. After 
                                                          
2 Tr. 10-12, 20-24, 51-52; Answer; Exhibits 1, 5; Exhibits F, H. 
 
3 Tr. 32-39; Answer; Exhibits 1 – 3, 5; Exhibits A – D, I.  
 
4 Tr. 20-23, 48-49; Exhibit 1.  
 
5 Tr. 11-12, 20-39, 45-47; Exhibit 1, 5; Exhibits F, H.  
 
3 
 
the monthly mortgage payments increased, Applicant was unable to pay the mortgage 
and his family’s other recurring expenses on his salary alone. He stared using credit cards 
to pay his bills.6  
 
Applicant used credit cards to manage his finances until about 2011. At that point, 
he retained the services of an online debt repair firm. The firm reached out to the five 
creditors holding Applicant’s credit card debt. Three of the creditors, who held a combined 
total of about $50,000 in credit card debt, agreed to settlements and payment 
arrangements. Applicant paid his debts to these three creditors. The fourth creditor 
forgave Applicant’s credit card debt. The fifth creditor, which also held Applicant’s 
mortgage account, would not agree to a payment plan. Instead, the creditor garnished 
Applicant’s wages. After a year, this fifth credit card debt was paid. The garnishment, 
however, left Applicant unable to pay his mortgage and he defaulted on the home loan.7 
 
Applicant tried to remedy his delinquent mortgage account by applying for a 
modification. He submitted the necessary paperwork on at least two separate occasions, 
but the lender claimed never to have received it or lost the paperwork. Applicant then tried 
to sell the property. He received a short-sale offer of $460,000, but the bank rejected the 
offer. Applicant eventually agreed to voluntarily leave the home and allow the bank to 
foreclose on the property. The bank sent him a 1099-C, reflecting that they canceled the 
mortgage debt. The 1099-C also reflects that as of 2015, when Applicant’s former home 
was sold at a foreclosure auction, the fair market value of the property was $281,000.8 
 
Applicant’s current annual salary is approximately $95,000. He also receives about 
$3,000 a month in military retirement income. He pays about $1,600 a month for a small 
apartment, which is about half the amount of his old mortgage payments. He uses an 
online calendar to timely pay his recurring debts. A recent credit report reflects that 
Applicant has not incurred new delinquent debt. It also reflects a favorable credit score.9 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
                                                          
6 Tr. 11-12, 23-39, 47-49.  
 
7 Tr. 12, 24-39; Answer; Exhibit 5; Exhibits C, D. 
 
8 Tr. 24-39, 49-50; Answer; Exhibit 5; Exhibits A, D. 
 
9 Tr. 39-46; Exhibit D.  
 
4 
 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.10 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
                                                          
10 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.11 
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
financial issues cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities that 
are essential to protecting classified information.12  
 
In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions listed under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago . . . or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source . . . and there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection process. Rather, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles his or her personal financial 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
obligations to assess how they may handle their security obligations.13 Moreover, the 
resolution of past financial issues alone without evidence of true reform and rehabilitation 
is of limited probative value in the security clearance context.14 
 
Here, Applicant’s security clearance eligibility was called into question by his 
inability to pay his mortgage and other debts. His past financial problems were primarily 
attributable to certain matters largely beyond his control, notably, divorce. He financially 
overextended himself trying to provide a stable home for his children.  
 
Applicant stopped living on unsustainable credit card debt and started taking action 
to remedy his troubled financial situation in approximately 2011. He retained the services 
of a debt repair firm. With the firm’s help, Applicant settled and satisfied about $50,000 of 
credit card debt. He then attempted to address and resolve his mortgage, but his efforts 
were repeatedly stymied by the creditor and a deflated housing market. Nonetheless, as 
of the close of the record, Applicant was able to resolve the vast majority of the debts he 
incurred following the dissolution of his 28 year marriage. 
 
Applicant provided substantial documentation showing that he addressed and 
resolved all the SOR debts, except a relatively minor $700 debt. Although he might benefit 
from counseling to better manage his finances, his current financial situation does not 
raise a security concern. In short, Applicant’s past financial problems do not cast doubt 
on his current judgment, reliability, and ability and willingness to handle and safeguard 
classified information. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply, in full or in part, and mitigate the 
security concerns at issue.  
 
In reaching this conclusion, I also considered Applicant’s military service, highly 
favorable security record, the honesty and candor he exhibited during the security 
clearance process, and positive character traits.15 Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts about extending Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:          For Applicant 
                                                          
13 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
14 Compare, ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (despite the presence of unresolved debt, 
notably, a second mortgage loan tied to a property that had been foreclosed, Board upheld grant because 
clear evidence of reform and rehabilitation), with, ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) 
(applicant’s filing of overdue tax returns alone insufficient to mitigate security concerns, where no 
extenuating circumstances to explain the late tax filing or evidence of financial reform). 
 
15 See AG ¶ 2 (whole-person concept). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (relevant factors to consider in determining 
whether granting a person a clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of the United States). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
