 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00599 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2016, and elected a decision based 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 18, 2017, Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant received the FORM on January 26, 2017. He 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals received 
Applicant’s signed but undated response on or about February 7, 2017. He did not object 
to the Government’s evidence. He submitted a narrative response and three sets of 
documents, which are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE D and admitted 
without objection.1 The SOR and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the pleadings in 
the case. Items 2 through 5 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
 On November 6, 2017, I reopened the record until November 20, 2017, to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation. Applicant responded the 
next day, and indicated that he would be submitting additional documents. He did not 
respond further, and did not submit any further information. The record closed on 
November 20, 2017.2 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs are effective June 8, 2017, for all 
decisions after that date, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the 
SOR.3 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not affect my 
decision in this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e through 1.g, 1.j, 1.m through 1.o, and 1.q 
through 1.s. He admitted both SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i, but asserted that one was a duplicate. 
He denied SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.k, 1.l, 1.p, 1.t and 1.u. He provided brief narrative 
explanations for each debt, but no documents. I have incorporated his admissions into 
the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He was married from 1990 to 1991, and again from 1994 
to 2007. He has no children. After graduating from high school, Applicant served 
honorably in the United States Marine Corps from 1981 to 1990, and in the United States 
Army Reserve from 1991 to 2012. His Army Reserve service included activation and 
                                                          
1 With his FORM Response, Applicant also included a copy of the SOR and his answer. I have not marked 
them as exhibits, since they are duplicative of the pleadings.  
 
2 Hearing Exhibit (I).  
 
3 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
deployment to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom from about August 2004 to 
November 2005. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for about three months after returning from the 
deployment, until February 2006. Since then, he has largely worked as a systems 
administrator for various employers. He worked for one employer from February 2006 to 
about September 2008. After his second divorce, he moved to another state. He was then 
self-employed from about October 2008 to February 2010. Since then, he has worked in 
the defense industry. He has worked for his current employer since February 2012. He 
was most recently granted a security clearance in 2005. (Item 2) 
 
In October 2015, in connection with his employment, Applicant submitted a 
security clearance application (SCA). He disclosed numerous delinquent debts. He also 
indicated that he was in a monthly repayment plan with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service 
for past-due federal income taxes. He indicated that his debts were due to limited income 
after he moved to a new state following his divorce. (Item 2 at 35-43) In his November 
2015 background interview, Applicant also noted that he subsequently incurred hospital 
bills after he was diagnosed with cancer. (Item 5 at 11) Applicant’s credit reports, from 
November 2015 and January 2017, detail the 21 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
which total about $20,000. (Items 3, 4) 
 
Debts Denied 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a $3,624 judgment filed against Applicant in 2011. He disclosed the 
judgment debt on his SCA, and indicated that the account had been paid in full. He 
indicated that the judgment was issued by the circuit court in County H, and that the 
creditor was a collection agency. (Item 2 at 35) In SOR ¶ 1.a, the creditor is named as 
“Creditor H” (the same name as “County H”). The government’s credit reports, however, 
list the creditor for this debt as “Bank C.” (Items 1, 3, 4). Applicant denied the debt in his 
answer, asserting that it had been paid. In his FORM Response (AE A), he indicated that 
he had not received proof from the creditor that the account is resolved, but he asserted 
that a current credit report (which he did not provide) shows the judgment as satisfied.  
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.b ($6,433), a debt in collection to a bank. The account 
is listed on Item 3 as a debt in collection. Applicant has been paying $200 a month on the 
account, and provided documentation that as of February 2017, the balance due was 
$3,233. (AE A, AE B) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d is a $1,004 debt in collection to a bank. The account is listed on Item 3 
as a debt in collection. Applicant denied the debt, asserting that he had paid $100 a month 
to resolve the debt in full, and that a current credit report would verify this. (AE A) He did 
not provide corroborating documentation. 
   
 
4 
 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.k ($225), 1.l ($216), 1.p ($91), 1.t ($63) and 1.u ($46), 
all medical debts owed to the same collection agency. Applicant provided documentation 
showing that they have been paid. (AE C) 
 
Debts Admitted 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h ($349) and ¶ 1.i ($348) are debts to the same phone company but 
different collection agencies. Both are found on his November 2015 credit report. (Item 3) 
Applicant admitted both allegations but stated he only had one account with the company. 
(AE A) The account he admitted is unpaid.  
 
 Applicant admitted the remaining debts: SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($4,933, to a financial services 
institution); medical debts ¶¶ 1.e ($850), 1.f ($611), 1.g ($389), 1.j ($317), 1.m ($195), 1.n 
($195), 1.q ($79), 1.r ($71), 1.s ($65), as well as ¶ 1.o ($115, to a retailer). He indicated 
that he had yet to arrange payments on them. He provided no updated documentation as 
to their current status. 
  
 With his FORM Response, Applicant also included a February 2017 invoice from 
the IRS, regarding his $300 monthly payment arrangement for the $14,853 that he owed 
in past-due federal income tax. He also included documentation that he made a $300 
payment on that debt in February 2017. This document, part of AE D, reflects that he has 
a “balance due installment agreement” with the IRS covering “Tax Years 1997-2016.” The 
February 2017 payment relates to tax year 2013. Applicant did not explain, either on his 
SCA, in his background interviews, or in his FORM Response, how or when his tax debt 
occurred. This tax debt is not alleged in the SOR.4 
 
 In his FORM Response (AE A), Applicant asserted that his financial circumstances 
had changed since his background investigation began in October 2015. He indicated 
that he had learned he could take out a loan against the money in his 401(k) pension 
account. He asserted that this would allow him to pay off the remaining past-due debt on 
his credit report, which he estimated at about $10,000, as well as his overdue taxes. 
Applicant also stated that “I cannot take out a loan against [the 401(k)] if I may lose my 
clearance, as that would end my employment.” He also stated that he was willing to have 
his financial progress “monitored” by someone designated by his employer. (AE A)5 
 
Following reopening of the record, Applicant did not submit additional information 
or documents regarding his efforts to put such a plan into effect, despite being given the 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s federal tax debt is not alleged in the SOR as disqualifying conduct, though it may be considered 
to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances, to consider whether an 
applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation, or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case 
No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2016). Therefore, I will consider it accordingly.  
 
5 Here, Applicant essentially seeks a “conditional” clearance. Neither this administrative judge, nor the 
DOHA Appeal Board, has authority to grant a clearance on a conditional or probationary basis. ISCR Case 
No. 06-2244 at 2 (App Bd. Feb. 28, 2008). 
 
5 
 
 
opportunity to do so. Applicant provided no other details or documents about his current 
financial situation, such as his monthly income and expenses, or his assets.  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.6 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”7 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
                                                          
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
7 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained 
by known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may 
result from criminal activity, including espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.8 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns:  ¶¶ 19(a) “inability 
to satisfy debts” and (c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” These disqualifying 
conditions are applicable, given the record evidence of Applicant’s delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a, asserting that the debt had been paid. He disclosed 
it on his SCA, noting the specific dollar amount allegedly owed, and the fact that it was a 
judgment. The account is also listed on both credit reports in the record. Although the 
SOR named the incorrect creditor (the court where the judgment was issued, and not the 
creditor owed), I find that the Government provided sufficient evidence to support SOR ¶ 
1.a, given Applicant’s statements about the debt. Applicant did not provide documentation 
to support his assertion that the debt has been paid.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i are debts owed to the same phone company, though to 
different collection agencies. Both are found on Item 3, and the amounts owed are only 
one dollar apart. Applicant admitted both allegations but stated he only had one account 
with that phone company. I find that the two debts are the same, and resolve SOR ¶ 1.i 
for Applicant as a duplicate.9  
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
9 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice).  
 
 
7 
 
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem, and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶ 1.i, a duplicate, and the medical debts Applicant 
denied but also established that he had paid, as noted above.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to two main circumstances: the limited 
income he earned after he moved to a new state following his divorce, and his subsequent 
cancer diagnosis. Both are circumstances beyond his control. His divorce, however, 
occurred ten years ago, in 2007. He appears to have had some difficulty establishing 
stable employment after he moved to a new state in 2008. Yet he has been gainfully 
employed in the defense industry since 2010. This minimizes any ongoing mitigating 
effect of this circumstance. 
 
 At some point thereafter, Applicant was diagnosed with cancer. Several of the SOR 
debts are medical debts. Some of them have been paid. Some of them have not, but even 
so, I attribute Applicant’s medical debts to circumstances beyond his control, and resolve 
them in his favor under AG ¶ 20(b). This mitigates medical debts ¶¶ 1.k, 1.l, 1.p, 1.t and 
1.u (which have been paid) as well as SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.m, 1.n, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s 
(which have not). 
 
 For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), however, Applicant must provide evidence 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has not provided sufficient 
evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances in handling his non-medical 
debts. AG ¶ 20(b) therefore only partially applies.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant also did not establish that he has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. Chiefly, this is because he 
did not establish enough of a track record of steady payments towards his creditors. There 
are several non-medical debts which Applicant asserts have been paid, yet he did not 
submit corroborating documentation. It is reasonable to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.10 Applicant did not do so. Further, 
while he has articulated a plan to pay his remaining debts, he did not establish that he 
has put that plan into place. He did not establish that AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
 
 Further, it is well established that an applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a 
continuing course of conduct, and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of 
mitigation.11 Several of his non-medical debts are unmitigated even though they are listed 
only on Item 3, his November 2015 credit report.  
 
 I must also consider that, in addition to his SOR debts, Applicant has significant, 
ongoing, past-due federal tax debt. He referenced a $300-a-month payment plan on his 
October 2015 SCA, and documented a $300 payment in January 2017, in accordance 
with a payment agreement. He owed $14,583 in taxes at that time. His most recent 
payment concerned tax year 2013. Applicant’s tax debt is not alleged in the SOR, but I 
may consider it in evaluating evidence of mitigation and changed circumstances, as well 
as part of a whole-person analysis.12 In this regard, Applicant’s overdue taxes lead me to 
more questions than answers. They therefore serve to undercut a finding that Applicant’s 
finances are being resolved, are under control, are unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010).  
 
11 ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2016). 
 
 
9 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant did not provide sufficient documentary 
information that he is resolving his debts in a good-faith, responsible manner. Because 
Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity 
to observe his credibility based on demeanor.13 Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.n:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.u:  For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.                       
       
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23. 2013). 
