 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03473 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed to his 
financial problems and that he has been acting responsibly under the circumstances. 
With his employment income, disability pay, and his wife’s income, their combined 
earnings should be sufficient to pay for his family’s living expenses and current debts. 
His financial problems are being resolved. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 14, 2015. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 
17, 2017, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 11, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on June 14, 2017. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on June 26, 2017, setting the hearing for July 13, 2017. At the hearing, the 
Government offered six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). Applicant testified and submitted one 
exhibit (AE 1, post-hearing), comprised of several documents corroborating most of his 
 
2 
 
 
testimony. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. He denied 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.i. His admissions to the SOR and at his hearing 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He married his first 
wife in 1993 and divorced in 2004. He has one son, age 21, of this marriage. He 
remarried in 2005 and divorced in 2009. He married his current wife in 2014. Applicant 
graduated from high school in 1984, and attended college in 1984 and 1990, but has 
not earned sufficient credits for a degree. In 2015, he received a trade-vocational school 
certificate.  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps between April 1984 and May 1989, 
and was honorably discharged. He enlisted in the U.S. Army in August 1991, where he 
served as a Delta Force operator until his retirement as a master sergeant (E-8) in 
December 2010. While in the Army, Applicant possessed a top-secret clearance. There 
is no evidence that his clearance was ever suspended or that there were any issues of 
concern. In 2016, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) diagnosed Applicant with 
combat-related post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and awarded him a 100 percent 
disability rating. He is currently undergoing counseling and treatment. At his hearing, 
Applicant anticipated receiving his first disability payment in July 2017.  
 
During his last ten years in the service, Applicant deployed nine times for 
missions in Iraq and twice to Afghanistan. As a contractor, he deployed four times to 
Afghanistan. Most of his deployments were for 90 days and involved fast-paced, 
intense, dangerous missions. In between deployments, he trained for the next mission. 
 
After his retirement, between December 2010 and December 2014, Applicant 
worked for another federal agency (with its own clearance system) and some federal 
contractors. Part of his employment was as an independent contractor between August 
2012 and December 2014. He was unemployed from December 2014 to April 2015. He 
then raised money for a foundation supporting research for PTSD and other medical 
issues suffered by service members.  
 
In August 2015, Applicant’s current employer, a federal contractor, hired him as 
an instructor. His current salary is $67,500 a year. He anticipated a pay raise to 
$87,000, conditioned on his clearance eligibility. Applicant promised he would use his 
additional employment income and his disability compensation to pay the back taxes 
owed to the IRS. 
 
 
3 
 
 
In his August 2015 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had failed to file his 2014 
income tax return. He believed he owed $7,000 to the IRS in back taxes. He also 
disclosed a bank filed a judgment against him for $105,000, resulting from a deed in lieu 
of foreclosure. He explained that he and his then wife had purchased a farm, for which 
he signed a $600,000 loan. Several years later, in 2008-2009, they were going through 
a divorce, the real-estate market was crashing, and he could not afford to pay the 
mortgage. At about the same time, he was being deployed overseas. Applicant was 
unable to sell the property. To avoid foreclosure, he gave the bank a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure. The bank sold the property for $105,000 less than what he owed, and 
Applicant acquired the debt. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that he 
established a payment agreement with the creditor and made six $200 payments 
between January and July 2017. (AE A) 
 
During his April 14, 2016 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
explained that he had failed to pay his quarterly taxes for tax years 2012, 2013, and 
2014. He stated he was not aware that as an independent contractor he was required to 
pay estimated quarterly taxes. He indicated he hired an accountant to help him resolve 
his tax problems. He stated that his mistake was unlikely to repeat itself because he had 
learned from it, he now was aware of his obligation to pay estimated quarterly taxes, he 
was no longer an independent contractor but a wage employee, and he had retained an 
accountant to help him resolve his tax problems. 
 
Applicant told the investigator he was not aware of any of the medical accounts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.i. He believed his ex-wife incurred them illegally, and 
he was going to ask her to pay them. If not, he intended to dispute them. SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
through 1.i are reflected on the 2015 credit report (GE 3). Only SOR ¶ 1.e is reflected 
on the 2016 credit report. Because the accounts are less than seven years old, I infer 
that they have been resolved and not just removed from the credit report. Applicant 
presented documentary evidence showing that he disputed SOR ¶ 1.e on July 18, 2017.  
 
A review of the 2015 credit report shows Applicant had 22 accounts in good 
standing, 1 judgment filed against him (SOR ¶ 1.d), and 5 accounts in collection (SOR 
¶¶ 1.e through 1.i). The 2016 credit report shows 20 accounts in good standing, 1 
judgment (SOR ¶ 1.d), and 1 account in collection (SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant has acquired 
no new debt or delinquent accounts.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2013, 2014, and 2015. His documentary evidence shows he timely filed his 
2012 income tax return on April 15, 2013; paid W-2 or 1099 withholdings of $30,389; 
and owed $10,704 in back taxes as of December 2016. He filed his 2013, 2014, and 
2015 income tax returns on May 18, 2016. As of December 13, 2016, he owed $61,000 
for tax year 2013; $46,715 for tax year 2014; and $13 for tax year 2015. 
 
With his SOR answer, Applicant submitted an IRS Form 9465, showing he 
requested to establish an installment payment agreement. As of July 18, 2017, the IRS 
 
4 
 
 
had not responded, and Applicant retained the services of an attorney from the Tax 
Defense Network to help him resolve his problems with the IRS. 
 
Applicant owes his state $20,532 for unpaid income taxes for tax years 2013 
through 2015. (SOR ¶ 1.c) His documentary evidence shows that on February 2, 2017, 
he agreed to pay $300 monthly to resolve this debt. As of July 2017, he was current on 
his agreement. (SOR answer; AE A) 
 
Applicant was unemployed from December 2014 to April 2015. During 2015, his 
earnings were only $53,000, about $100,000 less than in 2012-2014. As of 2017, his 
yearly income was $67,500, still a substantial cut in earnings from his time in the service 
and for the years 2012 through 2014.  
 
Applicant testified he has learned his lesson the hard way. Leaving the military 
was a huge transition for him and it took him some time to get accustomed to his new 
life. He acknowledged that he should have been more responsible filing and paying his 
taxes. He believes he was doing the best he could based on his circumstances. 
Applicant testified that he never knew whether he was coming back from his 
deployments. He implied that his PTSD impaired his ability to prioritize and think 
straight. He highlighted his 24 years of military service during most of which he held a 
clearance without any issues or concerns. Applicant’s service speaks highly about his 
loyalty, dedication, responsibility, and integrity. Applicant credibly promised to continue 
paying his legal debts and to resolve his financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He failed to 
timely file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2013 through 2015; owes federal 
taxes for tax years 2012 through 2015; state taxes for tax years 2013 through 2015; and 
owes a $105,634 judgment. AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy 
debts”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) (failure to file or 
fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay . . . . 
income tax as required.” The record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 All of the above financial considerations mitigating conditions are raised by the 
facts in this case and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems are 
ongoing and recent. However, his financial problems could be attributed to, or were 
aggravated by, circumstances beyond his control - his 2009 divorce, the decline of the 
real-estate market, his 2010 discharge from the service, his periods of unemployment 
and underemployment, and his service-related medical condition (PTSD). Considering 
the evidence as a whole, I find that his financial problems occurred under circumstances 
unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged he should have been more responsible in addressing 
his tax obligations. It appears his many deployments, dangerous missions, and PTSD 
may have impaired his thinking process and clouded his ability to be responsible and 
dependable. Notwithstanding, he is now under medical treatment and appears to be 
doing better.  
 
 Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he retained the services of an 
accountant and filed all of his late income tax returns. He entered into a payment 
agreement with his state tax authority; he is making his payments, and appears to be 
current. In February 2017, he requested to establish an installment payment agreement 
with the IRS, but received no response. Frustrated with the lack of response, in July 
2017, Applicant retained an attorney to help him resolve his income tax problems. I find 
he is currently making a good-faith effort to resolve his tax debt. I also find Applicant has 
 
8 
 
 
received and is receiving financial counseling, and that there are clear indications that 
his financial problem is being resolved or under control. 
 
 Concerning the judgment, Applicant credibly explained that he and his wife 
purchased the property together and both were paying the mortgage. After his divorce, 
his earnings alone were insufficient to pay the mortgage and his living expenses. He 
maintained contact with the bank and attempted to resolve his mortgage loan before he 
deployed in 2010. Unsuccessful in his efforts to sell the property, he provided the bank 
with a deed in lieu of foreclosure hoping to resolve the debt. Applicant’s documentary 
evidence shows he recently established a payment plan with the bank and he is current 
with his payments. Applicant’s payment agreements are recent, but they are evidence 
of Applicant’s responsible efforts to resolve his financial situation. 
 
 Applicant disputed the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.i. He believed 
his ex-wife opened the accounts illegally. Apparently, after talking with her, she paid 
four of the accounts and they were removed from the 2016 credit report. Only SOR ¶ 
1.e remained in the 2016 credit report. However, Applicant’s documentary evidence 
shows he disputed that account with the credit bureaus and asked for its removal. As a 
retired veteran, Applicant is entitled to medical services. I find it unlikely that he would 
have incurred the alleged medical debts. 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish that his financial problems were 
caused or aggravated by circumstances beyond his control. Considering the evidence 
as a whole, and including his recent actions, Applicant was responsible under the 
circumstances. He disclosed some of his financial problems in his 2015 SCA. His 
mental health and financial situation are improving. With his job, the anticipated paid 
raise, his disability income, and his wife’s income, their combined income should be 
sufficient to pay for his family’s living expenses and current debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 51, received an honorable discharge from the Marine Corps after five 
years of service. He then enlisted in the Army and served 19 years. He retired 
honorably after a total of 24 years of service. He served 19 years as a Delta Force 
operator. During the last ten years alone, he deployed on 15 dangerous missions. While 
in the Army, Applicant possessed a top-secret clearance. There is no evidence that his 
clearance was ever suspended or that there were any issues of concern.  
 
 
9 
 
 
In 2016, the VA diagnosed Applicant with combat-related PTSD, and awarded 
him a 100 percent disability rating. He is currently undergoing counseling and treatment. 
He promised to use his disability compensation to pay his back taxes. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, 
circumstances beyond his control - his 2009 divorce, the decline of the real-estate 
market, his 2010 discharge from the service, his periods of unemployment and 
underemployment, and his service-related medical condition (PTSD). Applicant, given 
the nature, extent, and dangerousness of his military service, is deserving of some 
leeway under Guideline F, and he has earned the opportunity to show that he will meet 
his financial and tax obligations from this point forward. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, I find that his financial problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. 
Applicant presented sufficient information to establish that he is currently behaving 
responsibly and that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. The 
financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
