 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02058 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, the AGs were 
superceded by revised AG. The case will be decided using the new AG.  The outcome 
of the case would have been the same under the former AG.   
  
 On January 4, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 
27, 2017. On February 13, 2017, Applicant received the FORM. He was given 30 days 
to respond to the FORM. He did not submit a response to the FORM. On April 3, 2017, 
the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
2 
 
 
      Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits all the allegations. (Item 2)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking a security clearance. He 
has worked for his current employer since March 2015. He is a high school graduate 
and attended a technical school. He is married and has no children. (Item 3)   
 
On May 14, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant  listed delinquent income taxes for tax years 2008, 2010, 
and 2012. He also listed a delinquent student loan, a delinquent phone bill, a delinquent 
credit card account, a delinquent medical account, a debt for overpaid unemployment, a 
balance from a voluntary truck repossession, a balance from an involuntary car 
repossession, and a furniture store debt. (Item 3, section 26)  
 
A subsequent background investigation resulted in the SOR, which alleged 
seven delinquent accounts, an approximate total balance of $47,941. The accounts 
include a $12,525 car loan account that was charged off in February 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.a: 
Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 3); a $4,358 car loan account that was charged off in November 
2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 3); a $4,743 account that was charged off in September 
2015 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 6 at 3); three delinquent medical accounts placed for collection in 
the amounts of $175, $66, and $221 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f: Item 6 at 1-2); and a $25,853 
student loan account that was past due in the amount of $831. (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 6 at 3). 
It was also alleged that Applicant owes federal income taxes for tax years 2008, 2010, 
2012, and 2013. (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 3 at section 26). 
 
Applicant incurred delinquent debts because of his wife’s debts and due to 
several periods of unemployment and underemployment. He claims that he is making 
payments in accordance with payment plans towards the student loan account (SOR ¶ 
1.g), the $4,743 charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.c) and the tax debts (SOR ¶ 1.h).  He did 
not provide evidence of the payment plans or that he is consistently making payments 
towards these debts in his Response to the SOR. He did not submit a Response to the 
FORM. The status of the debts is unknown.  He intends to pay the remaining delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR when he is able to afford paying them. (Item 3, section 26; 
Item 4)  
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
4 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); AG &19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations); and AG ¶ 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax as required)  apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant encountered financial 
problems for several years now.  The SOR alleges $47,941 in delinquent medical and 
consumer debts as well as unpaid federal income taxes for tax years 2008, 2010, 2012, 
and 2013. Many of these debts became delinquent several years ago and remain 
unresolved.    
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
 
clear victimizations by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and 
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts);   
 
AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue); and  
 
AG ¶ 20(g) (the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements.) 
 
Only AG & 20(b) partially applies. Several periods of unemployment, 
underemployment, and his wife’s health issues were circumstances beyond Applicant’s  
control. This mitigating condition only partially applies because I cannot conclude 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. The amount of delinquent debt is 
significant and Applicant demonstrated financial irresponsibility during a period of over 
five years, to include incurring delinquent federal tax debts over four tax years.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because Applicant provided no evidence of financial 
counseling as well as evidence that his financial problems were being resolved and 
under control. AG & 20(d) does not apply. While Applicant claimed that he was making 
payments towards several of his delinquent accounts, he failed to prove that he was 
making regular routine payments towards these accounts. He provided no receipts, 
cancelled checks, bank statements, or receipts from the creditors indicating his payment 
history. All of the debts remain unresolved.  
 
AG & 20(e) does not apply because Applicant did not provide evidence that he 
had a legitimate reason to dispute any of the debts.  AG & 20(g) does not apply 
because Applicant did not provide a copy of his IRS tax repayment plan nor proof of 
routine regular payments towards his delinquent federal tax debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant establishes a 
a track record of resolving his delinquent debts and financial responsibility, he may 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment record. I considered his wife’s health issues. In the future, he may be able 
to demonstrate a track record of resolving his financial obligations. It is too soon to 
make this conclusion at this point. The security concerns raised under financial 
considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
