 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01170 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant’s first answer to the SOR was undated, but he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. His second answer was dated November 19, 2016. The 
case was assigned to me on February 15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 28, 2017, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on June 22, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
offered one exhibit (AE A), which was admitted without objection. The record was held 
open to allow the Government to offer a more recent credit report (GE 6). Applicant was 
served with a copy of GE 6 and posed no objections. It was admitted into the record. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 6, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all the allegations. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, 
I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old former employee of a defense contractor. He is 
currently being sponsored for a security clearance by his former employer. He worked 
for this employer beginning in November 2014 through October 2106. Before this job he 
was unemployed from May to June 2014. He has a bachelor’s degree. He married in 
1987 and divorced in 2014. He has three children.2  
 
 The SOR alleges one unpaid judgment and 24 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $21,162. The judgment and debts were listed in credit reports from 
January 2015, March 2016, December 2016, and June 2017. It also alleged Applicant 
deliberately failed to list any defaulted loans, debts turned over to a collection agency, 
and debts over 120 days delinquent within the past seven years on his security 
clearance application (SCA).3  
 
 Applicant‘s unemployment and divorce contributed to his financial problems. He 
also claimed that the majority of the debts were not his. He admitted knowing about the 
vehicle repossession debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) when he completed his SCA, but thought his ex-
wife took care of the debt. He also admitted knowing about the collection debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.b when he completed his SCA. He also admitted that he was not open and 
honest when interviewed by a defense investigator about his delinquent debts. He 
stated the remaining debts were paid or he denied them. He failed to produce 
documentation supporting either payment of the debts, or supporting his denial that he 
incurred the debts. He claimed he hired a debt-relief company (DRC) to examine the 
debts on his credit reports and determine if any debts were erroneous. He failed to 
provide documentation showing the agreement he entered with the DRC. He provided a 
document showing the removal of 33 entries from his credit reports. No explanation was 
given in the report for the removals and, except for one debt (SOR ¶ 1.h), no correlation 
was shown between the SOR debts and the removed entries. There is no 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 6, 19-20; GE 1-2. 
 
3 GE 1-6. 
 
 
3 
 
correspondence supporting Applicant’s claimed attempt to contact any creditors. 
Applicant’s outstanding obligations remain unresolved.4 
 
 Appellant is current on his student loan payments. His current take home pay is 
approximately $2,000 monthly. Other than his involvement with the DRC, there is no 
evidence of financial counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 31-49, 53; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 51. 
 
 
4 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find all the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple, and his inaction in addressing any of 
his debts shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s divorce and period of unemployment are circumstances beyond his 
control. Other than hiring a DRC, which achieved little practical results, Applicant has 
done nothing to address his debts and the judgment. Overall, the record evidence does 
not support that Applicant’s actions were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable.  
  
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. Given the unpaid 
status of all the debts, Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Evidence of 
good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts is lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply. Other than showing that SOR ¶ 1.h was removed from his credit 
report, Applicant failed to document disputes for the remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply, except to SOR ¶ 1.h.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
6 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant admitted the he was aware of at least two of his delinquent debts when 
he completed his SCA. I conclude that he intentionally withheld this information when he 
completed his SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Honestly completing an SCA is the initial crucial step in gaining access to 
classified information. The Government expects, and must rely on, the honesty of 
applicants during this process. Therefore, providing false information at this stage is not 
a minor offense. Such deliberate action casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service and the circumstances 
surrounding his indebtedness. I considered his period of unemployment and his divorce. 
However, I also considered that he has made no effort to resolve his debts. He also 
deliberately failed to list his debts on his SCA. He has not established a meaningful 
track record of debt management, which causes me to question his ability to resolve his 
debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.h:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.i – 1.y:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:   2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
