 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-01373 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not submit sufficient information to overcome the security concerns 
raised by his financial problems. His request for eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On March 6, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
On September 30, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On 
December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, 
effective for all security clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I 
have based my decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.2 
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On November 21, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support 
of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on January 10, 2017, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM and the record closed on January 23, 2017. I received the case on October 
1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $11,443 for six 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.f). Applicant denied the allegations at SOR 
1.b and 1.e. He admitted the remaining allegations and averred he was paying the 
debts at SOR 1.c and 1.d. In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a one-page 
handwritten statement stating he disputes SOR 1.a and 1.b and reiterating he is paying 
the debts at SOR 1.c and 1.d. In support of that claim, he provided a printout record of 
payments to the creditor. Applicant did not disclose any of the alleged debts when he 
submitted his e-QIP, but the information provided in two credit reports and a summary 
of his interview with a DOD investigator supports all of the SOR allegations. (FORM, 
Items 1 – 6). 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom he has 
worked since March 2015. He served in the United States Air Force from 1978 until 
1982. Applicant and his wife were married in December 1993, but separated in July 
2014. Applicant has four adult children. The debts at SOR 1.b and 1.e are for past-due 
child support payments; however, the record is unclear regarding for whom the support 
was ordered. Credit reports reflect these accounts were opened in 1996 and 1999, and 
that they have been delinquent since 2013. (FORM, Items 3 – 5) 
 
                                                 
2 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on six enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 – 6). 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant disputes some of the alleged debts but did not provided any 
documentation of those disputes. He also suffered a stroke during a prolonged period of 
unemployment. Applicant did not provide any information about the financial impacts of 
his medical problem or about his efforts to address his debts. Applicant did not present 
any information about his current finances. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d) of 
the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.9 A person who has access to such 
                                                 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
4 
 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s delinquent debts reasonably 
raised the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 
19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the 
ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant did 
not provide information sufficient to support application any of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20. At most, his discussion of his unemployment and a stroke he suffered 
while out of work raises the potential applicability of AG ¶ 20(b): 
 
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. 
 
However, for this mitigating condition to apply, Applicant must also establish that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He did not do so; despite the information 
                                                 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
regarding child support payments, this information is not sufficient to support his 
disputes or to show that his financial problems are being resolved and will not recur. 
The security concerns raised by the adverse information about Applicant’s finances are 
not mitigated. 
  
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Doubts about his suitability 
remain because of Applicant’s longstanding financial problems and the fact that he has 
not followed through on his stated intentions to repay his debts. Because protection of 
the interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, any 
remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to classified 
information.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
