KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Department Counsel advised the Judge that he had explained to Applicant that he had
an “absolute right” to receive 15 days notice of the hearing, and Applicant agreed to waive that
right. Upon questioning from the Judge, Applicant agreed that he waived that right and
acknowledged that he had sufficient time to prepare for the hearing. Due to Applicant’s waiver
of the 15-day notice, the Judge also left the record open for a month. Applicant was adequately
informed of his 15-day notice of hearing right, and he knowingly and intelligently waived that
right. The record contains no basis for Applicant to have assumed that he was entitled to a
favorable outcome or that his waiver for the 15-day notice requirement would have resulted in
any particular outcome. He was not denied the due process that the Directive affords. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-03485.a1
DATE: 11/9/2017
DATE: November 9, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03485
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 6, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On August 14, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether Applicant was denied due process
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm.
The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns from
2006 through 2012 and that he had four Federal tax liens filed against him totaling about $59,000. 
Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations.  He attributed his tax problems to believing
mistakenly that payments he received were non-taxable travel expenses instead of his salary.  In
2015, he learned from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that those payments were taxable.  In
November 2016, he began working with an IRS agent to resolve his tax problems.  In a letter  from
April 2017, the IRS agent states that he anticipates Applicant’s case will be resolved once the returns
are received.  Prior to receipt of the SOR, Applicant worked with a tax preparer on filing his 2010-
2012 income tax returns.  After the hearing, Applicant submitted a letter indicating that his 2010-
2013 income tax returns have been finalized and have been faxed to the IRS agent.  He is now
working on his 2006-2009 income tax returns.  For 2014-2016, he filed his income tax returns and
paid his income taxes.  The Judge concluded that none of the mitigating conditions fully applied
because Applicant had not yet filed any of the income tax returns in question nor had he begun
resolving the four Federal tax liens.        
In the appeal brief, Applicant states that he “agreed to waive my right to the 15 days from
the date of the notice of appeal.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  From the context of his brief, it is apparent that
Applicant is referring to his waiver of the right to have at least 15 days advanced notice of the time
and place of the hearing under Directive ¶ E3.1.8.   He contends that he waived the 15-day notice
requirement based on his assumption that the “word” of the IRS agent would carry enough weight
for the Judge to issue a favorable decision.  He further states, “Had I known that the word of the IRS
agent would not be sufficient for a favorable decision I would have exercised my right to have the
15 days from the notice . . . and my case would have taken place later in the year and [the Judge]
would have seen that I am currently in an installment agreement and my taxes all filed.”  Appeal
Brief at 1.   
At the beginning of the hearing, Department Counsel advised the Judge that he had explained
to Applicant that he had an “absolute right” to receive 15 days notice of the hearing, and Applicant
agreed to waive that right.  Tr. at 7.  Upon questioning from the Judge, Applicant agreed that he
waived that right and acknowledged that he had sufficient time to prepare for the hearing.  Tr. at 8. 
Due to Applicant’s waiver of the 15-day notice, the Judge also left the record open for a month after
the hearing to provide him the opportunity to present additional documentation.  Tr. at 9 and 79- 84. 
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that Applicant was adequately informed of his 15-
day notice of hearing right, and he knowingly and intelligently waived that right.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 06-24213 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 10, 2008).  The record contains no basis for Applicant to
have assumed that he was entitled to a favorable outcome or that his waiver of the 15-day notice
requirement would have resulted in any particular outcome.  He was not denied the due process that
the Directive affords. 
Applicant contends he presented documentation that he filed his 2010-2013 Federal income
tax returns.  In her findings of fact, the Judge correctly noted that Applicant presented a post-hearing
letter in which he stated he finalized those tax returns and faxed them to the IRS agent. He did not
submit copies of those tax returns with that letter.  The Board has previously noted that it is
reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation showing resolution of their
financial problems.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.  07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  In the
absence of evidence corroborating Applicant’s post-hearing statement, the Judge did not error in
concluding that Applicant had not yet filed his tax returns for the years in question.  Additionally,
even if Applicant had established that he filed those tax returns after the hearing, the Judge could
still consider the circumstances underlying his tax filing deficiencies for what they may reveal about
his worthiness for a security clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 17,
2015). 
In his appeal brief, Applicant provided information that he did not previously submit to the
Judge.  Such information constitutes new evidence that the Appeal Board cannot consider.  Directive
¶ E3.1.29.  The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence.  For example, he argues that the statements provided by the IRS agent and
his tax preparer should be sufficient to resolve the security concerns.  The presence of some
mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance
decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether
the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00650 at
2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax
returns and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and
reliability required of those granted access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
08782 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 5, 2017).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
