 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 16-01456 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s family connections to in-laws in the People’s Republic of China are 
close and continuing. The People’s Republic of China aggressively seeks classified and 
protected information from the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are 
not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 11, 2015, Applicant signed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1. 
On October 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns 
under Guideline B (foreign influence). Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 
1, 2006 AGs).  
 
On November 8, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a hearing. HE 3. On December 13, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On July 5, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On July 5, 2017, the Defense 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for July 11, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. Applicant waived 
his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing. Tr. 13-14.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 16-18; GE 1-2; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-B. On July 19, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or 
after June 8, 2017. I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the 
new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
China. HE 4. The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for 
those facts. Department Counsel’s AN request is quoted at pages 4-7 infra, with 
footnotes in the original omitted and minor grammatical changes. AG ¶ 6, Foreign 
Influence, provides, “Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider the 
country in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this 
case necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning China.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).   
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact2 
 
The SOR alleges in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b that Applicant’s mother-in-law and sister-in-
law are citizens and residents of the People’s Republic of China. Applicant admitted 
both of the SOR allegations, and he provided extenuating and mitigating information. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old scientist employed by a defense contractor. Tr. 6. In 
2004, he graduated from high school, and in 2008, he received a bachelor’s degree in 
engineering physics. Tr. 6-7. In 2010, he earned a master’s degree, and in 2014, he 
received a Ph.D. degree in physics. Tr. 7. In 2007, he married, and his two children are 
ages five and two. Tr. 7-8, 26. 
 
From May 2005 to July 2005, Applicant studied in China when he was an 
undergraduate. Tr. 27-28. He met his future wife while he was in China. Tr. 28. In 2007, 
shortly before they married, she emigrated from China to the United States. Tr. 28.  
Applicant’s spouse was born in China, and she is now a naturalized U.S. citizen. Tr. 22; 
AE A at 10-11. China does not recognize dual citizenship, and Applicant’s spouse is 
solely a citizen of the United States. GE 2. Applicant traveled to China in 2005, 2007, 
and 2009. Tr. 29. His spouse traveled to China in 2009, 2012, and two additional times. 
Tr. 29. Her most recent visit to China was in February 2017. Tr. 30. 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law passed away in 2012. Tr. 28-29. His mother-in-law is a 
62-year-old citizen and resident of China, and she was a clerk or accountant for her 
Chinese county. Tr. 20-21. She retired from this position in 2004. Tr. 21. She receives a 
government pension. Tr. 33, 35. She traveled to the United States in 2011, 2012, and 
2014. Tr. 21, 30. Applicant has intermediate skills in the Chinese language, and he 
communicates with her using email about family matters. Tr. 21. She is aware that 
Applicant has a Ph.D. and is employed as a scientist. Tr. 21. He does not discuss other 
details of his employment with her. Tr. 21. He communicates with her about twice a 
month, and his spouse communicates with her a little more frequently than Applicant 
communicates with her. Tr. 31, 36. Applicant made some gifts to his mother-in-law 
totaling about $1,200. Tr. 32-33. 
 
Applicant’s sister-in-law is a 22-year-old citizen and resident of China, and she is 
studying for a master’s degree in computer science at a university in China. Tr. 22. She 
is attending school on a government scholarship. Tr. 36. She traveled to the United 
States in 2013. Tr. 22; AE A at 4. She is aware that Applicant has a Ph.D. and is 
employed as a scientist. Tr. 23. He does not discuss other details of his employment 
with her. Tr. 23. He communicates with her using email. Tr. 23. When Applicant’s in-
laws traveled to the United States, they stayed with Applicant. Tr. 30. He communicates 
with his sister-in-law about twice a month, and he does not know how often his spouse 
communicates with her. Tr. 31. Applicant made gifts to his sister-in-law totaling about 
                                            
2 To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
$300. Tr. 32. In 2011, Applicant’s sister-in-law applied to move to the United States. Tr. 
33; AE A at 10-11. 
 
Applicant stated that his in-laws in China do not have and have never had high-
level Chinese Government positions. Tr. 38. He believes his in-laws would not place 
him in a compromising position. Tr. 38. In the event of a conflict of interest, he would 
choose the interests of the United States over China. Tr. 38. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor for two years described him as demonstrating exceptional 
technical creativity and making outstanding contributions to the government. Tr. 34; AE 
B. He is dedicated and diligent. AE B. His personal conduct is exemplary, and his 
supervisor recommends approval of his security clearance. AE B.  
  
China 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. “China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-
mail.” 
 
In assessing the military and security developments in China, the U.S. 
Department of Defense has reported that: 
 
“Chinese actors are the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic 
information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent 
threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat will evolve with 
continuing technological advances in the global information environment.” 
 
“In the long term, Chinese leaders are focused on developing the capabilities 
they deem necessary to deter or defeat adversary power projection and counter third-
part[ies] including U.S.-intervention during a crisis or conflict. China’s military 
modernization is producing capabilities that have the potential to reduce core U.S. 
military technological advantages.” 
 
“China very likely uses its intelligence services and employs other illicit 
approaches that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security 
and export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials 
unobtainable through other means.” 
 
“In 2015, numerous computer systems around the world, including those owned 
by the U.S. Government, continued to be targeted for intrusions, some of which appear 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to be attributable directly to China’s Government and military. These and past intrusions 
were focused on accessing networks and exfiltrating information.” 
 
“China is using its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection against the 
U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense industrial base sectors that support U.S. 
national defense programs. The information targeted could potentially be used to benefit 
China’s defense industry, high-technology industries, and provide [China] insights into 
U.S. leadership perspectives on key China issues. Additionally, targeted information 
could inform Chinese military planners’ work to build a picture of U.S. defense networks, 
logistics, and related military capabilities that could be exploited during a crisis.” 
 
China uses “State-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase the 
level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, development, 
and acquisition.” 
 
The organizational network of China’s military-industrial complex is such that the 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is able “to access sensitive and dual-use technologies 
or knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research and development.” 
 
As recently as March 2016, for instance, a Chinese national pleaded guilty to 
participating in a conspiracy, between approximately October 2008 through March 
2014, to hack into the computer networks of major U.S. defense contractors, steal 
sensitive military-including data relating to military aircraft that are indispensable in 
keeping our military personnel safe--and export-controlled data, and send the stolen 
data to China. 
 
China has in place “a long-term, comprehensive military modernization program 
designed to improve its armed forces’ capacity to fight short-duration, high-intensity 
regional conflicts” and, “as China’s global footprint and international interests grow, its 
military modernization program has become progressively more focused on investments 
for a range of missions beyond China’s periphery . . . .” 
 
There are also numerous examples of individuals who have been convicted of 
conspiring to violate federal export control laws by illegally exporting defense equipment 
to China, of which only the most recent is cited here. Most recently, in June 2016, a 
California resident was convicted in Federal District Court of conspiring to illegally 
export fighter jet engines and unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) and related technical 
data to China, in violation of the Arms Export Control Act. 
 
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported: 
 
“Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese government has conducted large-
scale cyber espionage against the United States. China has compromised a range of 
U.S. networks, including those of DoD, defense contractors, and private enterprises.” 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
“China’s material incentives for continuing this activity are immense and unlikely to be 
altered by small-scale U.S. actions.” 
 
“China’s progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to China’s 
substantial and sustained investment in defense research and development (R&D). 
China’s large-scale, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property and proprietary 
information also has allowed China to fill knowledge gaps in its domestic defense and 
commercial R&D.” 
 
Since the 1990s, China “has promoted ‘civil-military integration’ to facilitate the 
transfer of commercial technologies for military use. As part of this effort, China has 
encouraged civilian enterprises to participate in military R&D and production, sponsored 
research into dual-use science and technology, and developed common military and 
civilian technical standards.” 
 
“With the emergence of a more modern and able domestic defense industrial 
base, China is gradually shifting its focus from purchasing complete foreign systems to 
procuring foreign military and dual-use subsystems and components via open sources, 
trade, and traditional and nontraditional espionage. Among China’s most effective 
methods used to acquire sensitive U.S. technology are cyber espionage; witting and 
unwitting collection by Chinese students, scholars, and scientists; joint ventures; and 
foreign cooperation.” 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China in 2015, the U.S. 
Department of State reported: 
 
“The People’s Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in which the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members hold 
almost all top government and security apparatus positions.” 
 
“Repression and coercion markedly increased during the year, particularly 
against organizations and individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy, and 
public interest and ethnic minority issues,” and against lawyers and law firms that took 
on sensitive cases. 
 
Human rights concerns that were observed during 2015 also included: extralegal 
measures to prevent public expression of critical opinions; repression of speech, 
religion, association, assembly and movement for certain minorities; extrajudicial 
killings; enforced disappearance and incommunicado detention, including prolonged 
detentions at unofficial holding facilities (“black jails”); torture and coerced confessions 
of prisoners; detention and harassment of individuals who sought to peacefully exercise 
their rights under the law; a lack of due process in judicial proceedings; searches of 
premises without warrants; monitoring of communications (including telephone 
conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet 
communications); opening of domestic and international mail; failure to respect freedom 
of speech and the press; severe restrictions on peaceful assembly, as well as severe 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
restrictions on citizens’ freedom of association. Additionally, citizens lacked the right to 
change their government and had limited forms of redress against the government.  
 
The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. “Hotel rooms (including meeting rooms), offices, cars, taxis, 
telephones, Internet usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, and 
personal possessions in hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched” without 
knowledge or consent.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in China. In 2007, she immigrated to the United 
States, and she was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. Her mother and sister are citizens 
and residents of China. He has frequent3 contact with his mother-in-law and sister-in-
law, and his spouse has frequent contact with her mother.        
 
Applicant lives with and is close to his spouse. His spouse has relatives living in 
China. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 
at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect influence 
from a spouse’s relatives living in China could result in a security concern. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India of close 
family members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its human 
rights abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his spouse) having foreign 
family contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).   
 
Applicant and his spouse’s relationships with residents of China create a concern 
about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his 
desire to help relatives living in China. For example, if intelligence officials, or other 
entities in China, wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on 
his spouse’s relatives living in China. Applicant would then be subject to coercion 
through his connections to China and classified information could potentially be 
compromised. 
 
Applicant and his spouse’s close family ties with her family living in China, are 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his 
spouse has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of China with the United States, places a significant, but not an 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his and his 
spouse’s relationships with family members living in China do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist relatives in China. 
  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from China 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his 
spouse, or their relatives living in China, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such 
a possibility in the future. Applicant and his spouse’s relationships with family members 
living in China create a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist her relatives in 
China by providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence of Applicant and his spouse’s relationships with her family living in 
China. Department Counsel has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of 
any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant and his spouse have 
frequent contacts with her relatives living in China. Their contracts and communications 
are casual and family related; however, Applicant’s in-laws in China are aware that he is 
a scientist with a Ph.D. Moreover, they communicate using email, and Chinese 
intelligence officials are known to monitor email. Loyalty to, support for, and connections 
to family are positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those 
same relationships and Applicant’s specialized education and background negate the 
possibility of full mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). Applicant failed to fully meet his 
burden of showing there is little likelihood that his relationships with relatives in China 
could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. Applicant, his spouse, and his two children are 
citizens and residents of the United States. China does not recognize dual citizenship, 
and Applicant’s spouse is solely a citizen of the United States. When Applicant 
volunteered to assist the U.S. Government as a contractor, he manifested his 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other countries.   
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family living in China. There 
is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Chinese Government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, his spouse, or their 
relatives living in China to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.4 As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant, his spouse, or her relatives living in 
China would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation.  
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in China. 
Applicant’s spouse’s relatives living in China could become potential targets because of 
Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to classified 
information could theoretically add some risk to them from intelligence elements in 
China. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(d), 8(e), and 8(f) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not 
encouraged Applicant’s involvement with anyone living in China. Applicant is not 
required to report his contacts with citizens or residents of China. There is insufficient 
information about Applicant’s assets in the United States to mitigate security concerns. 
 
In sum, Applicant and his spouse’s connections to her relatives living in China 
are significant. She is sufficiently close to family in China to raise a security concern. 
Her mother and sister are citizens and residents of China. Applicant has frequent  
contact with his mother-in-law and sister-in-law, and his spouse has frequent contact 
with her mother. His mother-in-law and sister-in-law have visited Applicant in the United 
States. His mother-in-law and sister-in-law received funds from Applicant, and they 
receive funds from the Chinese government (pension and scholarship funds). Applicant 
traveled to China in 2005, 2007, and 2009. His spouse traveled to China four times after 
emigrating from China to the United States. Her most recent visit to China was in 
February 2017. Applicant has significant connections to the United States; however, 
they are not sufficient to overcome his and his spouse’s connections to China. Foreign 
influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                            
4 There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration” of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old scientist employed by a defense contractor. In 2004, 
he graduated from high school, and in 2008, he received a bachelor’s degree in 
engineering physics. In 2010, he earned a master’s degree, and in 2014, he received a 
Ph.D. degree in physics. In 2007, he married, and his two children are ages five and 
two. Applicant’s supervisor for two years described him as demonstrating exceptional 
technical creativity and making outstanding contributions to the government. He is 
dedicated and diligent. His personal conduct is exemplary, and his supervisor 
recommends approval of his security clearance.  
 
Applicant has significant connections to China. Applicant’s spouse was born in 
China. In 2007, she emigrated from China to the United States, and she was naturalized 
as a U.S. citizen. Her mother and sister are citizens and residents of China. Applicant 
has frequent contact with his mother-in-law and sister-in-law. Applicant and his spouse 
have visited China since 2007 several times, and her relatives from China have visited 
Applicant and his family in the United States. Applicant has provided financial gifts to his 
mother-in-law and sister-in-law. Applicant’s mother-in-law and sister-in-law know he is a 
scientist with a Ph.D. They communicate with him using email, and Chinese intelligence 
monitors email. 
 
In ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017) the Appeal Board 
considered a Guideline B case involving a U.S. citizen with family members in China 
and commented: 
 
In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved 
and the intelligence gathering history of that government are among the 
important considerations that provide context for the other record evidence 
and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the 
case. The country’s human rights record is another important 
consideration. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006). There is a 
rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose 
interests are adverse to the United States and the risk that the applicant 
might fail to protect and safeguard classified information. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 10-07436 at 3, n. 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2011). 
 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
We note record evidence and the Judge’s findings of the following: 
Applicant’s parents reside in China; Applicant communicates with them 
frequently; Applicant has visited them or they her on a regular basis; 
Applicant’s parents are aware of the location and general nature of her 
work; China practices espionage against the U.S.; and China has used its 
cyber-espionage capability to compromise DoD and contractor computer 
systems. This evidence supports the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s 
parents could become a means through which Applicant could come to 
the attention of Chinese intelligence personnel and be subjected to 
coercion or pressure.  
 
There are some factual differences between Applicant’s case, and ISCR Case 
No. 15-00528 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017); however, the issues of security concern in that 
case and Applicant’s case are similar. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00042 (App. Bd. 
July 6, 2016) (denial of security clearance due to connections to China affirmed); ISCR 
Case No. 14-03200 (App. Bd. July 16, 2015) (same); ISCR Case No. 12-04780 at 3 
(App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013) (stating “The PRC’s history of conducting espionage against 
the United States puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant that he was unable to meet 
because of his ties to his relatives who are PRC citizens and residents.”). 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. It is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security 
clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
