 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-01042 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and 
are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 8, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 6, 2016. 
She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 through 7 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009. She took 
additional college classes in 2009 through 2012, but did not earn a degree. She married 
in 1993. She and her husband have been separated at different times over the past ten 
years, but are currently living together. They have two children, ages 24 and 16. She has 
worked for her current employer since 1993.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 22 unresolved debts totaling approximately $59,150. In her 
answer, Applicant admitted these debts. The allegations are also supported by 
disclosures in Applicant’s security clearance application, credit reports from October 2015 
and June 2016, and bankruptcy records. Six of the SOR-alleged debts are for student 
loans (¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, total balance-$35,699). She attributed her financial problems to 
inconsistent income contributions from her husband during periods they were separated. 
She also attributed the problems to assisting her mother with medical expenses from 
2014 when she was ill, until she passed away in July 2016. Some of the debts alleged 
are for medical bills related to ongoing medical care for Applicant, others are consumer 
debts. Some of her delinquent debts began accumulating in 2011.3  
 
 Applicant and her husband filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2016. Under the 
terms of the Chapter 13 plan, they were to pay $1,700 per month for the first 2 months 
and then $1,775 per month for 58 months. Applicant indicated in her answer to the SOR, 
that $1,700 was being garnished from her husband’s wages. It is unknown why the 
ordered amount was not being garnished. Applicant did not provide documentary 
evidence to show the full amount was being garnished or paid.4 
 
 Applicant provided a copy of the bankruptcy trustee’s record that reflects that the 
amount paid for May 2016 and June 2016 falls short of the amount ordered to be paid. 
                                                          
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant did not provide an explanation or additional records to support that they have 
been making consistent accurate payments to the trustee.5  
 
 A review of Applicant’s bankruptcy schedules shows that Applicant and her 
husband owe additional delinquent debt beyond what is alleged in the SOR.6 Included in 
the schedules are a debt to the Internal Revenue Service ($5,821) for unpaid taxes for 
tax years 2011 through 2014, a state tax lien ($74), a debt for unpaid property tax ($538), 
and a delinquent mortgage account. It appears from the bankruptcy record that Applicant 
has other student loans not alleged that are deferred.7 
 
 The bankruptcy documents also reflected a July 2016 motion to the bankruptcy 
court from Applicant’s mortgage lender. The motion indicated that Applicant and her 
husband had failed to make their mortgage payments for May, June, and July 2016, as 
required, and owed $3,727. The matter was settled by the court, which ordered Applicant 
and her husband to resume, in September 2016, their regular monthly mortgage payment 
of $1,242, and to cure the arrearages of $4,970, by paying $552 a month for eight months. 
It is unknown if they complied with the order.8 
 
 In November 2015, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. She 
told the investigator that she had student loans. She did not know the balance owed or 
the identity of the creditors. She had not made timely monthly payments and recently had 
obtained a hardship forbearance for the loans. She did not know when she would be able 
to pay them. She stated she rotated paying her bills because it was difficult to pay them 
all when they were due, and she tried to pay them in the most timely manner.9 No 
additional documentary evidence was provided to substantiate Applicant is in compliance 
with the Chapter 13 plan. Other information about her current finances was not provided.  
 
Policies 
 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any 
final unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
                                                          
5 Item 2 at page 10. 
 
6 Item 7. I will not consider the additional debt or any other derogatory information for disqualifying purposes, 
but may consider it when making a credibility determination, in the application of mitigation, and in a whole-
person analysis. 
 
7 Some of the student loans may be the same as those alleged in the SOR.  
 
8 Item 7. 
 
9 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is 
set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
5 
 
 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2011 and 
are unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts. She and her husband filed for Chapter 
13 bankruptcy protection in March 2016. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to 
conclude she is in compliance with the plan. Her financial problems are recent and 
ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to her husband’s failure to contribute 
financially when they were separated. She also indicated she had medical expenses 
 
6 
 
 
associated with her mother and herself. Specific information was not provided. These 
were conditions that likely were beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) 
Applicant must provide evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. It 
is unknown when Applicant and her husband reconciled, and when he began contributing 
to the household income. It is unknown what efforts were made to address the debts 
before they filed bankruptcy. Filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy may show that a person is 
attempting to responsibly address delinquent debt, but Applicant failed to provide 
documentation to show she is in compliance with the plan. There is insufficient evidence 
to show Applicant has responsibly addressed her delinquent finances. AG ¶ 20(b) has 
partial application. 
 
 As part of the bankruptcy proceedings, financial counseling is required. For the 
application of AG ¶ 20(c), Applicant must show there are clear indications that the 
problems is being resolved and under control. There is insufficient evidence to make such 
a conclusion. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is evidence that Applicant had a Chapter 
13 payment plan. There is evidence that some payments were made to the plan, but not 
the amount ordered. Applicant did not provide additional evidence to explain the deficient 
payments or that she is in compliance with plan. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a trustworthiness determination by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. She has been working since 1993. She and her husband 
were separated at different times during the past 10 years, and she could not rely on his 
 
7 
 
 
income to help her with her finances. It is unknown when Applicant’s husband returned 
to the home. She helped her mother with her medical needs from 2014 to 2016. Applicant 
and her husband filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2016. The evidence is insufficient 
to conclude that they are in compliance with the payment plan. In addition, the bankruptcy 
records reflect other delinquent debts that are not alleged, including unpaid federal taxes 
for multiple tax years, a state tax lien, and delinquent property taxes. Applicant has 
numerous student loans that she also owes. She has not established a reliable financial 
track record. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a trustworthiness determination. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
