 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 16-00629 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Available information is not sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by Applicant’s financial problems. His request for eligibility to occupy a position of 
trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 27, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position 
for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine1 that it is clearly 
                                                 
1 Required by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive). 
 
 
2 
 
 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for eligibility 
to occupy a public trust position. 
 
 On August 18, 2016, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raised trustworthiness concerns under the adjudicative guideline 
(AG)2 for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR 
(Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on March 21, 2017, and scheduled the matter for a hearing 
on May 15, 2017. For reasons stated at hearing,3 I rescheduled this matter for hearing 
by video teleconference on July 11, 2017. Both parties appeared as scheduled. 
Department Counsel submitted documents identified as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 
3. Applicant testified and submitted documents identified as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A 
– C.4 I admitted all proffered documents without objection. I received a transcript of the 
hearing on July 17, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $22,505 for 22 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.c, 1.e – 1.v, and 1.x); that in February 2013, 
he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition that was dismissed two months later (SOR 
1.d); and that he had not yet filed his federal income tax return for the 2011 tax year 
(SOR 1.w). In response, Applicant admitted SOR 1.a – 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h – 1.l, 1.r – 1.v, 
and 1.x. He also provided information showing the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 
1.k were paid off on various dates between July 2007 and March 2015. He denied the 
remaining allegations, and claimed by affidavit that he has never had an account with 
the SOR 1.g and 1.p creditors. In addition to the facts established through Applicant’s 
admissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. Since September 2004, he has worked for a defense 
contractor in a position that requires eligibility to occupy a public trust position. In June 
2015, Applicant moved from State A to State B to take a different position with the same 
company. His employer has DOD contracts for support of the health care system used 
by members of the military, and Applicant’s duties include safeguarding personally 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. Publication of the DOD Manual 5200.02 did not affect the adjudicative guidelines 
applicable to this case. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. 
My decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 Tr. 7 – 8. 
 
4 In addition to Ax. A – C, the documents Applicant provided with his Answer are included in the record 
without objection. (Tr. 9 – 10) 
 
 
3 
 
 
identifiable information (PII) associated with the health care system’s constituents. (Gx. 
1 and 2) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married since July 2005. He has three children 
ages 10 to 14, and two stepchildren, ages 18 and 20. Applicant claims some of his debt 
arose from the medical needs of one of his stepchildren; however, he did not provide 
any information in support of that claim. Since August 2015, Applicant has held a 
second full-time job. He is able to do so because his defense contractor job involves 
work at night. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Tr. 25) 
 
 As noted, above, the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.k have been 
resolved. Each was resolved through wage garnishments. (Answer; Gx. 2) 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel asked Applicant about the affidavit he supplied 
with his Answer in support of his denial of SOR 1.g and 1.p. Specifically, Applicant was 
confronted with the fact that, in his August 2015 interview with a government 
investigator, he had acknowledged having an account with either the SOR 1.g or 1.g 
creditors. Applicant conceded at hearing that he did have those accounts, but averred 
that he disputed the amounts alleged as past due. Applicant denied the debt at SOR 1.o 
because he believes it was in his wife’s name; however, his credit history lists this as an 
individual account attributable solely to him. (Answer; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 33 – 34, 35) 
 
 Applicant stated in his 2015 interview and in his testimony that he plans to 
contact the creditors for the debts at SOR 1.f – 1.j, 1.l – 1.v, and 1.x to negotiate 
resolution of each debt. As of the hearing, he had not taken any such action. (Answer; 
Gx. 2; Tr. 32 – 39) 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2011 federal income tax return on time due to oversight. 
With his Answer, he provided a copy of a return he filed in September 2012 after 
receiving a letter from the IRS. (Answer; Tr. 38) 
 
 In August 2016, Applicant contacted a financial counseling company for help in 
resolving his debts. That company provided him useful information about how to 
manage his finances and how to address his debts. Applicant did not enroll in a formal 
program, and he has not provided information that shows he is acting on the guidance 
he received. (Answer; Tr. 39 - 40) 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a combination of poor decisions and 
the costs of raising a large family. He also referred to his period of hospitalization in 
2014 and his stepson’s medical issues as having an adverse impact on his finances; 
however, he did not provide details about either circumstance. During his August 2015 
interview, he acknowledged he could not meet both his current obligations and his past 
debts. In 2013, he and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, but voluntarily 
withdrew it by mutual agreement with their attorney. No repayment plan was ever 
established and the bankruptcy court did not dismiss the petition for any compliance 
failure. (Answer; Gx. 1 – 3; Tr. 24, 32, 41 - 42) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s wife has been able to return to work since their move to State B in 
2015. Together they bring home about $4,300 monthly. Applicant estimates they have 
about $500 remaining after expenses, which do not currently include payments on any 
of his remaining debts. (Answer; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Tr. 25 – 29) 
 
 Applicant has a good reputation at work. His father, a retired military officer, 
believes Applicant is trustworthy and understands the importance of safeguarding 
sensitive information. (Ax. B and Ax. C) 
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a position of public trust must be based on a determination that it is 
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.5 All such 
adjudications must adhere to the procedural protections in the Directive before any 
adverse determination is made. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and 
material information,6 and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication 
policies in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the 
factors, commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, listed in the guidelines at 
AG ¶ 2(d).7 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by 
itself, conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever 
a case can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the 
grant or denial of eligibility for a position of trust. 
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a 
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  
 
 A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect sensitive information as his or her 
                                                 
5 Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix A, Paragraph 1(d).  
 
6 Directive, 6.3. 
 
7  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
5 
 
 
own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access should be 
resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Available information was sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The 
facts established by the remaining allegations reasonably raise a trustworthiness 
concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
  Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, 
or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required). Applicant has a history of unpaid debts, most of which remain unresolved. He 
also did not file his federal income tax return in 2011 as required. By contrast, I also 
have considered the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 As to Applicant’s 2011 income tax return, AG ¶ 20(g) applies because he has 
filed his return, albeit late. The record does not support, however, any of the other AG ¶ 
20 mitigating conditions. Applicant’s financial problems are longstanding and continue 
today. His debts do not appear to result from unusual circumstances, and he has not 
taken any action to repay them. The debts that have been resolved here were the result 
of wage garnishment. Applicant has not taken any direct action to resolve any of his 
debts, and he did not provide a cogent plan for future debt resolution. His brief foray into 
bankruptcy protection may have been a viable solution, but Applicant decided in short 
order to abandon that action. Although he contacted a credit counseling firm after 
receiving the SOR, it does not appear that he has put into action any of the advice they 
provided. Based on this record, I cannot conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns raised by the Government’s information. 
 
 I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors 
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the 
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). The Government does not expect Applicant to 
be debt-free; however, he is expected to demonstrate that he is dealing responsibly with 
his financial problems. Absent such information, doubts remain about his suitability for a 
position of public trust. Because protection of the interests of national security is the 
principal focus of these adjudications, such doubts must be resolved against granting 
eligibility.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c, 
  1.e – 1.v, and 1.x:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.w: For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
