 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01331 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 30, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on October 11, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 13, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 24, 2017, scheduling the hearing for February 23, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one 
witness. The record was left open until March 23, 2017, for receipt of additional 
documentation. On March 21, 2017, Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) A, 
which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) 
on March 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations of the SOR, except for allegation ¶ 1.h., 
which is a duplicate of allegation ¶ 1.b. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since October of 2012. (GX 1 at pages 5 and 12.) 
He has held a security clearance, off and on, since about January of 2007, when he 
went on active duty with the U.S. Army. (TR at page 16 line 13 to page 17 line 13, and 
GX 1 at pages 32~33.) He is not married, and has no children. (GX 1 at pages 20~21.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant filed for the protection of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in September of 
2005, and had “around $15,000” of debt discharged in December of 2005. (TR at page 
14 line 22 to page 16 line 12.) He was an immature 20-year-old, who went on active 
duty about 13 months later, was deployed to Iraq, injured in combat, and medically 
discharged in 2010. (Id.) 
 
 The vast majority of Applicant’s admitted past-due debts are the result of student 
loans, which became due in the summer of 2011, when Applicant left school. (TR at 
page 18 line 10 to page 26 line 10.) 
 
 1.b. and 1.h. These are one and the same student-loan debt to Creditor B 
totaling about $15,587. (TR at page 40 line 22 to page 41 line 2.) Applicant is paying 
$188.75 each month towards this student loan debt. (Id). This is evidenced by 
transaction statements covering six months. (AppX A at pages 1 and 6.) I find that 
Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this student-loan debt. 
 
 1.c.~1.g. These are student-loan debts totaling about $20,744. (TR at page 41 
lines 3~11.) Applicant is paying $250 each month towards these student loan debts. 
(Id.) This is evidenced by loan statements and by a Statement of Account from the 
successor creditor to this debt. (AppX A at pages 2~5.) I find that Applicant is making a 
good-faith effort to address these student-loan debts. 
 
 1.i. Applicant has paid the admitted past-due $942 debt to Creditor I, as evidence 
by an October 2016 credit report. (TR at page 41 lines 12~18, and Answer at pages 
5~6.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 
3 
 
 1.j. Applicant has paid the admitted past-due $475 debt to Creditor J, as 
evidence by an October 2016 credit report. (TR at page 41 lines 12~18, and Answer at 
pages 7~8.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.k. Applicant has paid the admitted past-due $2,446 student-loan debt to 
Creditor K, as evidence by correspondence from Creditor K. (TR at page 41 lines 
12~18, and Answer at page 9.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant had a bankruptcy in 2005, and significant past-due indebtedness. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy occurred more than a decade ago, when Applicant was 
young and immature. He has now addressed all of the alleged past-due debts, the vast 
majority of which are student loans. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (d) has been 
established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has the support of those who 
know him in the workplace. (TR at page 42 line 24 to page 44 line 14, and AppX A at 
page 7.) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.k:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
