 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03429  
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
November 30, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On May 1, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On December 8, 2016, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 19, 2016. He requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On April 26, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
 
2 
 
 
received by Applicant on May 23, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 6 are admitted 
into evidence, and hereinafter referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 6.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR, with explanations.  He provided no additional supporting documentation 
for eligibility for his security clearance.    
 
 Applicant is 48 years old, divorced, and has a step-son.  He has a bachelor’s 
degree in Architecture. He works for a defense contractor as a Senior Architect.  He has 
been working with his current employer since November 2010, and in the defense 
industry since 1993.  A security clearance is required in connection with his employment 
in the defense industry.  Applicant was granted a security clearance in 2010.  
 
 Applicant admits that he used marijuana from August 1983 until at least June 
2014, throughout a period of 31 years.  He states that after receiving his security 
clearance in 2010, he has not purchased or possessed any illegal drug including 
marijuana.  He did use marijuana in 2014 in a private setting with close friends while on 
vacation from work.  He further states that he does not use illegal drugs regularly, and 
never in a work environment, during his weekly work routine, or amongst strangers.  His 
last use of marijuana occurred in 2014.  He states that he has never used any other 
illegal drug except marijuana.  (Government Exhibit 2.)     
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application dated May 1, 2015, wherein 
he was asked in Section 23, concerning illegal use of drugs or drug activity, if he has 
ever illegally used or otherwise been involved with a drug or controlled substance while 
possessing a security clearance.  Applicant responded, “NO.”  (Government Exhibit 3.)  
This was a false answer.  He failed to disclose the fact that he used marijuana in 2014.  
He states that he forgot about his use in 2014 when answering the question, and did not 
 
3 
 
 
intend on being deceptive.  He states that at the time, he answered the questions 
truthfully to the best of his knowledge and ability.  (Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions are established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from August 1983 to at least June 2014.  He received a 
security clearance in 2010. Therefore, AG ¶  ¶ 25 (a), (c), and (f) are established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. The two conditions set forth below are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant admits to his marijuana use while holding a security clearance.   
However, he fails to provide anything else in mitigation.  AG ¶ ¶ 17(a) and (b) do not 
prove full mitigation in this case.  There is no evidence in the record that Applicant has 
changed his association with his friends that use drugs, his environments where the 
drugs are used, nor has he provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from illegal 
drug use in the future.     
 
 Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant states that he misread and interpreted the question wrong in response 
to whether he has ever used any illegal drug while possessing a security clearance.  
The question is clear, simple, and not confusing.  His excuse is meritless.  It can 
therefore be assumed that he deliberately attempted to conceal his marijuana use in 
 
6 
 
 
2014 from the government on his e-QIP.  He obviously knew it was wrong, against the 
law, and against DoD policy when he used marijuana in 2014, and when he deliberately 
falsified his security clearance application in response to the questions concerning this 
marijuana use.  He did not answer the question truthfully, which shows poor judgment, 
unreliability and untrustworthiness.  There are no applicable conditions that could be 
mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a long history of 
employment with the defense industry.  He also has a long history of marijuana use.   
This conduct clearly diminishes his reliability, trustworthiness, and/or good judgment by 
his complete disregard for DOD policy and security concerns that prevent the use of 
illegal drugs including marijuana.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his Drug 
Involvement and Substance Abuse and Personal Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
