 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-01119 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., and  
Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence of reform and 
rehabilitation to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from a 
well-established pattern of failure to conform his behavior to the law, as shown by 
multiple arrests, charges, and convictions for alcohol-related incidents during 2010-
2015. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on June 17, 2015.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on July 30, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1.  
 
 
2 
 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline G for alcohol consumption and 
Guideline J for criminal conduct.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2016; he admitted the factual 
allegations in the SOR; and he requested a hearing. His answer to the SOR included a 
one-page memorandum in explanation. His case was assigned to me December 7, 
2016. The hearing took place as scheduled on March 17, 2017. The hearing transcript 
(Tr.) was received March 27, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as an engineer technician in the field of aviation maintenance for a federal contractor. 
His educational background includes an associate’s degree, and he is currently 
pursuing a bachelor’s degree.2 His first marriage ended in divorce, and he has a 
daughter born of that marriage. His employment history includes honorable service in 
the U.S. Marine Corps during 2006-2011, which included two overseas deployments.3   
 
Applicant admits a history of five alcohol-related incidents during 2010-2015. 
First, he was arrested and charged with driving while impaired in April 2010. He pleaded 
guilty in state court and was ordered to complete 24 hours of community service. He 
also received non-judicial punishment from the Marine Corps, which resulted in 
reduction in rank and pay grade and other punishment.  
 
Second, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while impaired, driving 
while license revoked, and civil revocation driver license in 2011 while he was on 
terminal leave from the Marine Corps. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 30 days 
in jail for the driving while impaired offense and received probation or a suspended 
sentence on the other matters.4  
 
Third, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving or attempting to drive a 
vehicle while impaired in 2013. This incident occurred when Applicant was driving home 
after attending a bachelor’s party. He pleaded guilty in exchange for receiving the 
disposition of probation before judgment on the primary offense.5 The sentence 
included 20 days in jail (suspended), a $185 fine, and court costs.  
 
                                                          
2 Exhibits F and I.  
 
3 Exhibit D.  
 
4 Exhibit 3.  
 
5 Exhibit 4.  
 
 
3 
 
Fourth, Applicant was arrested and charged with spinning tires, driving or 
attempting to drive a vehicle without a license, driving or attempting to drive a vehicle 
while under the influence, and driving or attempting to drive a vehicle while under the 
influence per se in 2014.6 He pleaded guilty to an amended charge of reckless driving 
and was ordered to pay a $485 fine and court costs, while the other charges were nolle 
prossed.7 
 
Fifth, Applicant was arrested and charged with two counts of second-degree 
assault stemming from a fight outside a bar in March 2015. Although not alleged in the 
SOR, he explained it was alcohol-related as he had two to three beers before the fight. 
He also explained that his involvement resulted from stepping in to defend his brother 
from an aggressor, the aggressor threw a punch, and he responded. One charge was 
nolle prossed, and he pleaded guilty to the other assault charge in exchange for 
receiving six months of unsupervised probation before judgment, which ended on 
January 1, 2016.8 
 
Applicant has had a valid driver’s license issued by his state of residence since 
February 2017.9 Before that, his license was suspended for more than three years 
(since about October 2013). He was largely compliant during that time, but there were 
occasions when he drove without a license, such as the 2014 alcohol-related incident 
discussed above. 
 
Applicant presented evidence of reform and rehabilitation. In 2013, he attended a 
26-week alcohol-treatment program and was discharged as successful.10 His enrollment 
in the program stemmed from the 2013 alcohol-related incident discussed above. 
Likewise, in 2015, he underwent a substance-abuse evaluation and was then enrolled in 
a 12-week treatment program.11 It is noted that the March 2015 fight discussed above 
occurred while he was enrolled in this program. He successfully completed the program; 
his breathalyzers were negative for alcohol use, and his urinalysis screens were 
negative for illegal chemical substances; and he demonstrated motivation for non-
drinking behavior in the future. He also completed a driver-improvement program a few 
months later in 2015.12 He has a good employment record as shown by a favorable 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 5.  
 
7 Exhibit A.  
 
8 Exhibit 7.  
 
9 Tr. 48-51.  
 
10 Exhibit H.  
 
11 Exhibit B. 
 
12 Exhibit E.  
 
 
4 
 
letter of recommendation from his direct supervisor.13 He also presented a highly 
favorable letter of recommendation from a retired Marine noncommissioned officer.14 
 
At the hearing, Applicant made no excuses for his misconduct and recognized 
that he made poor decisions when he was drinking alcohol. He stated he has been 
sober and has abstained from alcohol since April 2015, the month after the last alcohol-
related incident,15 and he stated that he is “done drinking.”16 He stated that sobriety has 
improved his life dramatically; he no longer hangs out or associates with people who he 
used to drink with; he volunteers for a veterans’ organization; and he is more focused 
on his parental duties being a good father to his daughter.    
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.17 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.18 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”19 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.20 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.21 
 
                                                          
13 Exhibit C.  
14 Exhibit G.  
 
15 Tr. 41, 66, and 80-81. 
 
16 Tr. 78.  
 
17 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
18 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
19 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
20 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
 
5 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.22 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.23 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.24 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.25 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.26 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.27 
  
Discussion 
 
 The alcohol consumption and criminal conduct matters are discussed together 
because they based largely on the same set of facts and circumstances. In analyzing 
the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
as most pertinent under Guidelines G and J, respectively: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the 
individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder;  
 
AG ¶ 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder;   
 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) the individual acknowledges [their] pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
                                                          
22 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
23 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
25 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
26 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
27 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
 
6 
 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
AG ¶ 31(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security security eligibility decision, but 
which in combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
AG ¶ 31(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted;  
 
AG ¶ 32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.    
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of five alcohol-
related incidents away from work ending with arrests, charges, and convictions during 
2010-2015. Taken together, his alcohol-related incidents constitute a well-established 
pattern of failure to conform his behavior to the law, which suggests he is not a good 
candidate for eligibility for access to classified information.   
 
 Turning next to mitigation, I considered the mitigating conditions noted above and 
none are sufficient to resolve this case in Applicant’s favor. Applicant was a problem 
drinker who exercised poor judgment when he was under the influence of alcohol. This 
is readily established by multiple alcohol-related incidents over a period of several 
years. In other words, this was not an isolated incident, and this wasn’t a problem for a 
limited period of time. Although he presented a decent case in reform and rehabilitation, 
it is simply too soon to tell if his days of being a problem drinker are truly behind him. On 
this point, I note that he completed unsupervised probation from the last incident on 
January 1, 2016, a period of less than two years ago, and he only recently obtained a 
valid driver’s licence in February 2017, a month before the hearing in this case. Given 
his well-established pattern of alcohol-related misconduct, additional time is necessary 
in order for Applicant to show that he can consume alcohol in a responsible fashion and 
be a law-abiding person. He’s on the right path, but he is yet to arrive at the destination. 
 
  Applicant’s history of alcohol-related incidents away from work creates serious 
doubt about his reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole 
 
7 
 
and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did 
not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
