1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 16-01799 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
November 1, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On December 5, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline G.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2016, and requested a decision 
based on the written record. On March 23, 2017, Applicant requested a hearing before 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) On April 25, 2017, Applicant’s counsel entered a notice 
of appearance. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on April 24, 2017, 
and then transferred to me on April 27, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 3, 2017, scheduling the hearing for July 25, 
2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf 
and called one witness. Applicant presented seven documents, which I marked 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G. The record was left open until August 1, 2017, for 
receipt of additional documentation. On July 26, 2017, Applicant presented AE H, which 
was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
August 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. She denied SOR 
allegation ¶ 1.d. (Answer; Tr. 7.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been 
working for her current employer, for eight years. She has held a security clearance for 
approximately ten years. She is divorced from two former husbands, and has two adult 
children. (GE 1; Tr. 31-34, 57.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that she was arrested in January 2002 and charged with Wet 
Reckless. She had a blood alcohol content of .09% when she was arrested. On this 
occasion, she was drinking alcohol at a bar celebrating her birthday with her friends. She 
testified she quit drinking several hours prior to attempting to drive home. She testified 
that as a result of this charge, she attended alcohol education classes and paid fines. (GE 
1; Tr. 35, 37.) 
 
 Applicant first started drinking alcohol in high school. Her alcohol intake increased 
in approximately 2012, after she learned disturbing news about her fiancée’s past. (Tr. 
35-36.) During a three-month period, she typically consumed half of a pint of vodka per 
day. On one occasion, Applicant “drank [herself] into a blackout  . . .and apparently picked 
up a gun and called [her] best friend . . . and told her [friend] that [Applicant] wanted to 
end [her] life.” (Tr. 59.) Applicant attended inpatient alcohol treatment for two weeks 
between May 2012 and June 2012, after her son approached her and expressed 
concerns about her drinking. During her treatment, she was diagnosed with Alcohol 
Dependence. (GE 3.) After discharge, she was recommended to abstain from alcohol use 
and attend recovery program meetings. She attended those meetings and abstained from 
alcohol use for “several months,” but, “foolishly thought [she] could learn how to drink and 
control it and drink in moderation.” (Tr. 40-41.) However, her alcohol consumption 
gradually increased. (Tr. 38-42.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant attended a 12-week outpatient alcohol treatment program from May 
2015 to July 2015.2 She successfully completed that program. It met three nights a week 
for three hours each meeting. She was again diagnosed with Alcohol Dependence. (GE 
3.) She indicated she sought treatment the second time because, she “would have long 
periods where [she] would drink for days, a couple of binges. Missed a couple of days of 
work and realized [she] needed to get [her] act together.” (Tr. 43.) As a result of this 
outpatient treatment, Applicant acknowledged that she did have “an alcohol problem.” (Tr. 
44.) She had one relapse during this treatment program. At the conclusion of treatment, 
it was recommended that she abstain from future alcohol use. (GE 6; AE C; AE F; Tr. 42-
45, 60-65.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that she has had “a couple slips” after completing the 
second out-patient treatment program. (Tr. 46.) She testified, “There were, I don’t know 
maybe three or four times when I would drink for a day or two. And then get my head out 
of a dark place and get back on track again.” (Tr. 46.) She testified that she consumed 
alcohol at Thanksgiving in November 2015, after she felt stressed by a visit from her 
mother. The last time she consumed alcohol was in January 2016. She consumed alcohol 
on that occasion due to receiving an upsetting email from her daughter. (AE F; Tr. 46-
47.)  
 
 After her most recent consumption of alcohol in in January 2016,3 Applicant made 
a commitment to herself to attend seven support meetings per week, for a year. She also 
went into therapy with a licensed psychologist. Her psychologist indicated in a December 
2016 letter that Applicant last drank on January 17, 2016. The psychologist opined that 
Applicant is “very committed to her recovery.” (AE A.) Applicant currently attends five 
support meetings per week and is no longer seeing the psychologist. (Tr. 48-56, 66.) She 
is committed to a sober life and has “learned that stress isn’t going to kill [her].” (AE F; Tr. 
45, 51, 66-67.) Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent indicating she will not 
use or consume alcohol again. (AE H.) 
  
 Applicant’s former boss, who is Chief Executive Officer of her company, testified 
on her behalf. He indicated Applicant is an honest, dedicated employee. He testified that 
Applicant has been forthcoming with him about her alcohol problem. He has no 
reservations with Applicant having access to classified information. (Tr. 25-30.) Applicant 
also presented multiple, highly laudatory, letters of recommendation from co-workers and 
members of her support groups. They all highlighted Applicant’s integrity, honesty, and 
trustworthiness. (AE G.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
                                                          
2 SOR ¶ 1.c was amended at hearing to correct the treatment dates from “May 2015 to July 2016” to “May 
2015, to July 2015.” (Tr. 72.) 
3 Applicant was unable to recall the exact sobriety date. (Tr. 70.) 
 
4 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with Wet Reckless in 2002. She has received 
inpatient alcohol treatment in 2012 and outpatient treatment in 2015. She was diagnosed 
with Alcohol Dependence during both programs. Alcohol Dependence was later 
incorporated in the diagnosis “Alcohol Use Disorder” in the most recent version of the 
Diagnostics and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders IV. All of the above conditions 
apply. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant has made significant strides in overcoming her alcohol dependency. She 
regularly attends support groups and sought therapy. She has learned to manage her 
stress. She has completed two separate rehabilitation programs. Despite her participation 
in those programs, she relapsed or “slipped” after both. She has not consumed alcohol 
since January 17, 2016. However, she has not demonstrated a sufficient period of 
sobriety at the present time to demonstrate a clear pattern of abstinence. None of the 
above conditions provide full mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected by those that know her professionally. Additionally, she has the trust and 
support of friends in her recovery support groups. Since January 2016 she has been 
sober and has demonstrated that she is committed toward sobriety. However, her long 
history of alcohol dependence at an advanced age leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s propensity for relapse. It casts doubt on her eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance at the present time. Should she maintain her sobriety, she may be 
eligible for a security clearance in the future, but it is too soon to tell whether Applicant 
will be able to abstain from alcohol for an extended period of time. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
