 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03953 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern raised by his state tax lien. He 
also intentionally failed to report his state tax lien on his May 2016 security clearance 
application. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 22, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on April 6, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on April 18, 2017. He did not respond to the Government’s FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. The Government’s documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He did not obtain a high-school diploma. He has 
worked as a phone technician for a defense contractor since August 2014. He worked 
as a phone technician for two prior defense contractors from November 2001 until 
August 2014. As of May 2016, he had never been married and had one adult child who 
lived with him. He also resided at the same rental property since August 2002.2     
 
 The SOR alleges a state tax lien for $39,492 entered against Applicant in 2016. It 
also alleges that Applicant falsified his May 2016 security clearance application when he 
failed to disclose his state tax lien in response to section 26. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations.3 
 
  In addition to his admissions, Applicant’s state tax lien is verified by a July 2016 
credit report and a December 2016 record of state judgments and liens. They reflect 
that Applicant’s state tax lien was entered against him on April 21, 2016.4  
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application on May 13, 2016. He 
intentionally failed to disclose his state tax lien. Above his signature, he certified: 
  
My statements on this form, and on any attachments to it, are true, 
complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are 
made in good faith. . . . I understand that a knowing and willful false 
statement on this form can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both 
(18 U.S.C 1001). I understand that intentionally withholding, 
misrepresenting, or falsifying information may have a negative effect on 
my security clearance, employment prospects, or job status, up to and 
including denial or revocation of my security clearance, or my removal and 
debarment from Federal service.5  
 
  
                                                          
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 1-2. 
 
4 Items 2, 4-5. 
 
5 Items 2-3. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay the $39,492 state tax lien entered against him in 
April 2016. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) as 
disqualifying conditions. As there is no evidence that Applicant’s state tax lien is tied to 
his income taxes, AG ¶19(f) does not apply. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant has not provided evidence of any efforts he may have taken to repay or 
otherwise resolve the $39,492 state tax lien entered against him in April 2016. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems happened so long ago or 
are unlikely to recur, and they continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. His state tax lien is not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(g) are not applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
6 
 
Applicant admitted that he intentionally failed to list his April 2016 state tax lien in 
response to section 26 of his May 2016 security clearance application. AG ¶ 16(a) 
applies. 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or 
significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual specifically 
concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the requirement to 
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and 
truthfully. 
 
 Applicant did not present any evidence in mitigation. He certified that he was 
aware that he was committing a criminal offense punishable by fine, imprisonment, or 
both, and that falsifying information could cause him to be denied a security clearance 
and lose his job. Despite these certifications, he falsified his security clearance 
application. I am unable to determine that the conduct is unlikely to recur. It continues to 
cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find 
that personal conduct security concerns remain. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) do not apply.      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
under Guideline F and Guideline E in this whole-person analysis. Applicant’s state tax 
lien remains unresolved and he intentionally falsified his security clearance application. 
He failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
