 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP1Case No. 16-02157 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 1, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and E.2 
(Item 1.) The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to 
sensitive personal information. 
 
 On January 6, 2017, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR (RSOR), and 
he requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 
1.)  On March 1, 2017, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A 
                                                          
1  The Statement of Reasons incorrectly cited this case as an ISCR case, but it is an ADP case.  
2 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the 
FORM, Department Counsel offered four documentary exhibits. (Items 1-4.) Applicant 
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on April 26, 2017. Applicant submitted 
no additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 
1, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He is married and has two children. He obtained an 
Associate’s degree in 2003. He is employed as a field support technician by a defense 
contractor, and he seeks access to sensitive information in connection with his 
employment in the defense sector. (Item 2.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists five allegations (1.a. through 1.e.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically regarding gambling issues, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations 
will be discussed below in the order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
1.a. The SOR alleges that from approximately 2000 through at least October 
2016, Applicant has engaged in compulsive gambling with varying frequency, which has 
resulted in the loss of at least $77,000.  Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. 
(Item 1.)  
 
1.b The SOR alleges that from April 2006 to December 2006, Applicant received 
treatment for a condition diagnosed as gambling addiction. Applicant admitted this 
allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)   
  
1.c. The SOR alleges that since at least 2015, Applicant has continued to gamble 
notwithstanding his treatment, as set for the in subparagraph 1.b., above for his 
gambling addiction. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
1.d. The SOR alleges that Applicant has borrowed money from various sources 
to finance his gambling habit. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
         
1.e. The SOR alleges that in about March 2006, Applicant stole approximately 
$3,000 from his employer to use for gambling. Applicant was arrested and charged with 
Felony Theft. Applicant plead guilty to the charge and was sentenced to five years of 
probation, 13 months of confinement and court-ordered gambling treatment. Applicant 
admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
 
 
3 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The SOR lists three allegations (2.a. through 2.c.) regarding Personal Conduct, 
under Adjudicative Guideline E. The allegations will be discussed below in the order 
they were listed on the SOR: 
 
2.a. The SOR alleges that in about April 2001, Applicant was charged with Theft 
–Shoplifting, and he plead guilty to the charge. Applicant admitted this allegation in his 
RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
2.b. The SOR alleges that in about October 2001, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with Theft – Take/Drive Motor Vehicle – No owner consent. He plead guilty to 
the charge. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
2.c. The SOR alleges that the information set forth in subparagraphs 1.a. through 
1.e., above also has Personal Conduct concerns. Applicant admitted this allegation in 
his RSOR. (Item 1.)  
 
Policies 
 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense Security Service and 
Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Because Applicant has had gambling problems for many years, even after he 
went through a gambling rehabilitation program and as recently as at least 2016, and 
because these gambling problems caused him other serious financial difficulties, I find 
that the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a), (c) (d), (h), and (i) as 
applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 No evidence was introduced to establish that Applicant's gambling issues are 
under control. Therefore, I do not find that any of the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20 
are applicable in this case, and I find against for Applicant under Guideline F. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. Because of Applicant's gambling issues as reviewed above under Guideline F, 
plus the two arrests for criminal acts of theft in 2001, I find that the evidence is sufficient 
to raise disqualifying conditions (c) and  (d), in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
7 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 listed below, but did not find that any of 
them are applicable in this case.  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
9 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for access sensitive information clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations and 
Personal Conduct trustworthiness concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a sensitive 
position. Eligibility for access to a sensitive position is denied. 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
