 
1 
                                         
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 16-00258 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant frequently used marijuana from 1999 to 2003, and in May 2007, he used 
marijuana and was charged with possession of drug paraphernalia and driving while 
impaired. He completed March 15, 2004, and October 21, 2014 Questionnaires for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance applications (SCA), and he did 
not disclose the negative information about marijuana involvement or his May 2007 arrest 
and charges. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On March 15, 2004, and October 21, 2014, Applicant completed and signed SCAs. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 2. On October 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on 
September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
                                         
 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the personal conduct guideline. 
 
On November 23, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 3. On December 29, 2016, Department Counsel issued an amended 
SOR. HE 4. Applicant received the amended SOR and elected not to admit or deny the 
allegations in the amended SOR. Transcript (Tr.) 17. On January 4, 2017, Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed. On July 17, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On 
September 13, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, setting the hearing for October 12, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was 
held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits; Applicant did not 
provide any documents; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted 
into evidence. Tr. 10, 18-19; GE 1-3. On October 20, 2017, DOHA received a hearing 
transcript.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b and 
he denied the other SOR allegations. He also made partial admissions of some SOR 
allegations, and he provided mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 37 years old, and the same DOD contractor has employed him for the 
previous 13 years. Tr. 6, 41. He is currently employed as a logistics analyst. Tr. 43. In 
1998, he graduated from high school. Tr. 6, 21. In 2002, he received a bachelor’s degree 
with majors in communications and theater arts. Tr. 7, 21. He has never married; his 
children are ages 6 and 13; and he has not served in the military. Tr. 7.  
   
From 1999 to 2002, Applicant used marijuana once or twice a month while he was 
attending college. Tr. 21. He continued to use marijuana until he obtained employment 
with a DOD contractor in February 2004. Tr. 21. 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Question 27 of Applicant’s March 15, 2004 SCA asked, “Since the age of 16 or in 
the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, 
for example, marijuana . . . ?” GE 2; SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant answered, no, and he did not 
disclose his extensive marijuana use from 1999 to November or December 2003. Tr. 24; 
SOR ¶ 1.c. He said he did not disclose his marijuana use because he wanted “this 
particular job,” and he had stopped using marijuana about three months before he 
completed the March 15, 2004 SCA. Tr. 23-24; SOR response. He needed the 
employment so that he could support his family. Tr. 24. In 2005, he received a security 
clearance. Tr. 25.  
 
In regard to marijuana use after he received a security clearance, Applicant said 
he “may have—I can’t remember totally. I may have smoked something once or maybe 
twice . . . .” Tr. 25-26. He conceded he used marijuana the day of his arrest in May 2007. 
Tr. 26. Then he said that the day of his arrest in May 2007 was the only time he used 
marijuana after receiving a security clearance. Tr. 26. 
 
In May 2007, Applicant drank four beers and two shots of vodka at a party. GE 3. 
He also used marijuana. He stopped consuming alcohol about three hours before leaving 
the party. GE 3. The police stopped Applicant because his tail light was not working. Tr. 
28. The police found drug paraphernalia and marijuana in his car. Tr. 29. Applicant said 
the drug paraphernalia was found under his passenger seat; he did not know it was there; 
and he did not know what it was. Tr. 29. In his interview, he “guessed” that they found his 
passenger’s marijuana on his passenger and rolling papers under the passenger seat. 
Tr. 29-30. His passenger was not arrested. Tr. 30. Then Applicant said the marijuana was 
found under the passenger seat too. Tr. 30. His breathalyzer was below the threshold for 
driving while intoxicated. GE 3. He said he did not understand how the police decided he 
was driving while impaired. Tr. 30. 
 
Applicant denied any knowledge that the marijuana or drug paraphernalia was in 
his car before the police discovery. Tr. 30. Applicant was facing five years in jail; his lawyer 
urged him to plead guilty; they dropped some of the charges; he pleaded guilty to 
possession of drug paraphernalia and driving while impaired; and he received two years 
of probation before judgment. Tr. 30-31, 38-39; SOR ¶ 1.a. While Applicant was on 
probation, he passed all drug tests, and after six months, he was released from 
supervised probation. Tr. 32. The court did not order, and he did not receive counseling 
for drug abuse. Tr. 52-53. 
 
Section 22 of Applicant’s October 21, 2014 SCA asked, “Have you EVER been 
charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?” GE 1 (emphasis in original); SOR ¶ 
1.d. Section 23 of his October 21, 2014 SCA asked, Have you EVER illegally used or 
otherwise been involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance . . . ?” GE 1 (emphasis in original); SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant answered, no, to both 
questions and did not explain his possession of marijuana in May 2007.      
 
Applicant said he conferred with coworkers and his boss, and based on what they 
told him, he answered no because he believed he only had to disclose his involvement 
with marijuana if it occurred within seven years of completion of his SCA. Tr. 33-34. He 
 
4 
                                         
 
chose to interpret the word “EVER” to really mean seven years. Tr. 34. He said he took 
“responsibility for answering that, ‘No,’ and not being truthful on that.” Tr. 35. 
 
On October 27, 2015, Applicant denied to an Office of Personnel Management 
investigator that he had ever been charged with an offense involving alcohol and drugs. 
Tr. 35; GE 3.3 When he was re-questioned, he denied that he had been charged with any 
offenses in the last seven years. GE 3. He was reminded that the investigator was seeking 
information involving drug offenses without any time limit. GE 3. Applicant then disclosed 
the above information about his May 2007 arrest and guilty plea. GE 3. He explained he 
was never charged with driving while impaired. Tr. 36. He was only charged with 
possession of drug paraphernalia. Tr. 36. He conceded he was charged with five or six 
charges; however, several were dropped due to lack of evidence. Tr. 36. He initially 
denied the charges to the investigator because it was a weak case and the charges do 
not represent what actually happened. Tr. 37.  
 
Applicant avoids locations where marijuana is used, and he avoids people that use 
marijuana. Tr. 27-28. One of Applicant’s closest friends continues to smoke marijuana; 
however, he does not use marijuana in Applicant’s presence. Tr. 43. He does not receive 
urinalysis tests for drug use from his employer. Tr. 28, 51. Applicant is a skilled musician 
who goes on tours sponsored by government agencies. Tr. 42. He expressed remorse 
for making inaccurate statements. Tr. 42. He said, “I realize I have lied about things in 
regards to marijuana and alcohol. It’s not something I’m proud of, but it doesn’t represent 
the work I’ve done as a contractor and with the government over the past 13 years.” Tr. 
49. He emphasized his overall career as demonstrating his reliability, dedication, honesty, 
and contributions to his employer and the DOD. Tr. 48-49. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
                                            
3 Applicant’s SOR does not allege that he consumed an excessive amount of alcohol or that he 
initially lied to the Office of Personnel Management investigator about his arrest record. In ISCR Case No. 
03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not 
alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-
00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). These 
allegations will not be considered except for the five purposes listed above. 
 
5 
                                         
 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
  
 
6 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,       
. . . determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . . ;4 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate 
behavior; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and   
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. . . . 
 
The record establishes AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(d), and 16(e). Applicant frequently used 
marijuana from 1999 to 2003, and in May 2007, he used marijuana at a party. At the party, 
he drank four beers and two shots of vodka. The police stopped him after the party. He 
was charged with possession of drug paraphernalia, driving while impaired, and some 
other offenses. His breathalyzer was below the threshold for driving while intoxicated. He 
subsequently pleaded guilty to possession of drug paraphernalia and driving while 
impaired. On his March 15, 2004 SCA, he falsely denied using marijuana in the past 
seven years. On his October 21, 2014 SCA, he falsely denied EVER using marijuana 
while holding a security clearance, and he falsely denied that he was EVER arrested for 
a drug-related offense. His assertion that he thought the questions on his 2014 SCA only 
sought information for the previous seven years is not credible. He took the time to ask 
coworkers for their opinions about the question, showing he read the question carefully 
and considered whether he should lie. He intentionally and deliberately falsified his 2004 
and 2014 SCAs. 
 
AG ¶ 17 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns under Guideline E: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
 
8 
                                         
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. While Applicant’s marijuana possession 
and use, possession of drug paraphernalia, and driving while impaired offenses are not 
recent, Applicant’s falsifications of his 2004 and 2014 SCAs are serious and not mitigated. 
Applicant cannot be trusted to admit embarrassing negative information even when that 
information is sought in a security context. Personal conduct security concerns are not 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline E are 
 
9 
                                         
 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old, and the same DOD contractor has employed him for the 
previous 13 years. He is currently employed as a logistics analyst. In 2002, Applicant 
received a bachelor’s degree with majors in communications and theater arts. He is a 
skilled musician who goes on tours sponsored by government agencies. He expressed 
remorse for making inaccurate statements. He said, “I realize I have lied about things in 
regards to marijuana and alcohol. It’s not something I’m proud of, but it doesn’t represent 
the work I’ve done as a contractor and with the government over the past 13 years.” He 
emphasized his overall career as demonstrating his reliability, dedication, honesty, and 
contributions to his employer and the DOD.  
 
 The evidence against mitigation of security concerns is more substantial. 
Applicant’s falsification of his SCAs in 2004 and 2014 by intentionally failing to disclose 
information about his criminal record and marijuana possession and use was deliberate 
and improper. His falsification in a security context raises a serious security concern. The 
protection of national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes 
security, even when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant 
cannot be trusted to disclose potentially derogatory information. He did not establish his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
