 
1 
 
 
`                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01158 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2016. The case was assigned to 
me on February 15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice of hearing on April 26, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 20, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit list was marked as 
hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but did not offer any exhibits at the hearing. 
The record was held open and Applicant submitted exhibit (AE) A. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the single SOR allegation in his answer. After a careful review 
of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since August 
2015 as an IT specialist. From June to August 2015, he was unemployed. From August 
2013 to June 2015, he was employed as an IT consultant. He married in 1995 and has 
one adult stepchild from the marriage. He has never held a security clearance.2  
  
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2011-2014. Applicant explained that he failed to timely file for those years 
because his wife owned an incorporated business and the business’s tax liability was 
not correctly computed, which impacted his ability to file his personal returns. His wife 
used a different tax preparer who incorrectly computed the tax liability. Applicant initially 
stated this problem surfaced starting with his 2013 tax return. When he was asked 
about why he failed to timely file his 2011 and 2012 tax returns as well, Applicant 
indicated he may have been mistaken as to when this issue first arose. He raised the 
issue initially when he affirmatively responded to a question on his September 2015 
security clearance application (SCA), asking whether he failed to file any federal or state 
tax return within the last seven years. He stated this occurred in 2013. During his 
background interview, Applicant admitted failing to file both federal and state tax returns 
for years 2012 to 2014. When Applicant received a request to supply tax account 
transcript information in response to interrogatories (July 2016), he complied and 
provided the federal tax transcripts for tax years 2011 to 2014 and similar 
documentation from his state for the same years. He also documented that he properly 
filed extensions for both his 2015 federal and state tax returns. Applicant admitted that 
he should have acted in a timelier manner in resolving his tax-filing issues.3  
 
 Applicant’s documentation shows that he filed federal tax returns as follows: 
2011 return (due in April 2012) in January 2013; 2012 return (due in April 2013) in 
October 2015; 2013 return (due in April 2014) in November 2015; 2014 return (due in 
April 2015) in February 2016. Although not alleged, Applicant documented that he 
                                                          
2 Tr. 5, 16; GE 1-2. 
 
3 Tr. 17-18, 23, 27; GE 1-2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
timely filed his 2015 federal tax return within his extension of time in October 2016. 
Applicant’s 2011-2014 federal tax returns were all filed before the issuance of the SOR.4 
 
 Applicant’s documentation shows that he filed state tax returns as follows: 2011 
return (due in April 2012) in December 2012; 2012 return (due in April 2013) in 
September 2015; 2013 return (due in April 2014) in October 2015; 2014 return (due in 
April 2015) in January 2016. Although not alleged, Applicant documented that he timely 
filed his 2015 state tax return within his extension of time in October 2016. Applicant’s 
2011-2014 state tax returns were all filed before the issuance of the SOR.5 
 
 Applicant testified that he currently owes no tax liability to either the federal or 
state governments. He pointed out that he never had any tax issues before his wife’s 
business tax issues impacted him. There is no evidence of any other financial difficulties 
for Applicant. His tax issues are resolved.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
4 Tr. 24-26; GE 2; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 24-26; GE 2; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. 18-20. 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant failed to file his 2011-2014 state and federal income tax returns when 
they were due. I find both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant addressed his tax-filing issues that resulted from his wife’s business 
and his own procrastination. He filed all the lacking federal and state tax returns before 
his SOR was issued. I find AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his personal 
circumstances and his efforts to resolve his tax issues.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph  1.a:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
