 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-02979  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 8, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 15, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On November 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
dated September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 9, 2017. He admitted all the allegations 
of the SOR with explanations. He requested that his case be decided by an 
administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On February 9, 
2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, was mailed to Applicant 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
on February 10, 2017, and received by him on February 26, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. Items 1 through 4 are admitted into evidence. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 In the FORM, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Pakistan. Department Counsel provided a six-page summary of the 
facts, supported by four Government documents pertaining to Pakistan, identified as 
Item 4. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. (Item 2 at page 5.) He is married, with three children. 
(Item 2 at pages 23, and 28~29.) He attended technical school in the United States, and 
served in the U.S. Army Reserve for five months. (Item 2 at pages 11 and 21.) He has 
worked for his employer since September of 2014. (Item 2 at page 13.) 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence  
 
 1.a. Applicant’s 40 year-old spouse is a citizen of Pakistan, and a resident of the 
United States. (Item 2 at pages 23~24.) She “is a house wife and has no employer.” 
(Item 3 at page 8.) At the time of Applicant’s March 2016 “Enhanced Subject Interview,” 
(ESI) she had “been issued” a U.S. “alien Registration Card.” (Id.) Furthermore, his 
spouse “is not known to have any direct affiliation with a foreign government, including 
Pakistan.” (Id.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant’s two brothers are citizens and residents of Pakistan. His oldest 
brother is 56 years old, and “is self-employed selling garments.” (Item 3 at page 4.) Any 
 
 
3 
 
 
employer this brother might have; would be his “clients,” who are unknown to Applicant. 
(Id.) Applicant “has phone contact with his brother 4 or 5 times a year.” (Item 3 at page 
4.) There is no evidence that this brother, apart from his citizenship, has any connection 
with a foreign government. 
  
 Applicant’s other brother is 54 years old, but “he [Applicant] doesn’t know how he 
is employed.” (Item 3 at page 4.) Applicant “has phone contact with his brother 4 or 5 
times a year.” (Id.) There is no evidence that this brother, apart from his citizenship, has 
any connection with a foreign government. 
 
 1.c. Applicant’s 52-year-old sister is a citizen of Pakistan; but resides in the 
United Kingdom, not in Pakistan as alleged. (Item 3 at page 4.) “She is a house wife 
and is not employed outside the home.” (Id.) He “has phone contact with his sister once 
a month.” (Item 3 at page 4.) There is no evidence that his sister, apart from her 
citizenship, has any connection with a foreign government. 
 
 1.d. Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Pakistan. (Item 3 at 
pages 4~5.) His 70-year-old father-in-law “was self-employed exporting work gloves to 
the US and is now retired.” (Item 3 at page 5.) He “has phone contact with his father-in-
law once a month.” (Id.) There is no evidence that his father-in-law, apart from his 
citizenship, has any connection with a foreign government. 
 
 Applicant’s 66-year-old mother-in-law “is a house wife and is not employed 
outside the home.” (Item 3 at pages 4~5.) He “has phone contact with his mother-in-law 
once a month.” (Item 3 at page 4.) There is no evidence that his mother-in-law, apart 
from her citizenship, has any connection with a foreign government. 
 
 1.e. The ESI noted one friend of Applicant who is a citizen and resident of 
Pakistan. (Item 3 at page 5.) Applicant “has phone contact 4 or 5 times a year,” but 
does not “know how he is employed,” (Id.) There is no evidence that this friend, apart 
from his citizenship, has any connection with a foreign government. 
 
 I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to Pakistan: The State 
Department warns U.S. citizens against all non-essential travel to Pakistan. While al-
Qa’ida’s presence in Pakistan has been seriously degraded, it remains a threat. 
Pakistan also has serious human rights problems. (Item 4 at pages 1~6.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant‘s spouse, parents, parents-in-law, three siblings, and a friend are 
citizens of Pakistan. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 There is absolutely no evidence that Applicant’s foreign relatives and his friend 
have any connection with the Pakistani government. Apart from his U.S.-resident wife, 
his contact with them is not unreasonable. Applicant served in the U.S. Army Reserve, 
and now serves his country as a “consultant.” (Item 2 at page 13.) I find it highly unlikely 
he will be placed in a position of having to choose to act against U.S. interests vis-à-vis 
his foreign relatives or his friend. Foreign Influence is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. He has met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for Foreign Influence. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through1.e.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
