 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-01828 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 4, 
2014. On August 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, admitting all of the SOR allegations except 
for SOR ¶ 1.a. Department Counsel withdrew SOR ¶ 1.a before the hearing. Applicant 
attached a Special Power of Attorney (SPOA) and copies of an e-mail chain reflecting 
confusion about his state-tax withholdings, to his answer. He admitted to owing 
delinquent state and federal income taxes as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. Applicant 
also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on April 7, 2017. On June 14, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for August 10, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted several documents, which 
were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through O, and admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 17, 2017. I granted Applicant’s request to 
leave the record open until August 24, 2017, so that he could provide substantiating 
documentation.2   
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He graduated from high school in 1983, and obtained 
an associate’s degree in 2005. Applicant has been employed as a deputy project 
manager for a federal contractor currently working at an overseas naval support activity 
since 2015. He served honorably in the U.S. Air Force from 1983 until he retired in 
2009. Applicant was married in 1987 and divorced in 2008. He re-married in 2008 and 
reports four adult children. He also reported previous security clearances while he was 
on active duty as a subject matter expert in anti-terrorism and force protection. He 
disclosed his failure to file and pay state income taxes to state A for tax year (TY) 2011, 
and federal income taxes for TY 2012, in section 26 of his November 2014 SCA. He 
explained that he had problems filing since he was constantly deployed overseas. He 
also provided a SPOA appointing his uncle as attorney in fact to file his income tax 
returns.  
 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
2 Tr. at 101. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s November 4, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and the summary of his personal subject interview (PSI) on 
January 26, 2015.  
 
 
3 
 
 
In his personal subject interview (PSI) (GE 2) in January 2015, Applicant stated 
that he owed state A $861 for back taxes from TY 2011. State A was his home of 
record. He filed his 2011 state A tax return in October 2013 when he returned to the 
U.S. briefly. He was to start a payment plan in February 2015, paying $304 a month to 
state A. He explained in the PSI that he was traveling extensively overseas and failed to 
file his federal income tax return for TY 2012. He owed $5,677 to the IRS. He was to 
start a payment plan to IRS in February 2015, with an unstated monthly amount. 
Applicant also failed to file and pay his TY 2012 state A income tax return and he owes 
$8,534 for that TY. His employer improperly filled out his W-4 paperwork and wrongly 
assumed that his home of record would be in the state B where the employer site was 
located. Thus, no state income taxes were withheld by the employer for state A, but 
they were withheld for state B. Applicant claims he could not resolve this error quickly 
because of his isolated, overseas location. Eventually, it was resolved and he was to 
start a payment plan with state A in February 2015. 
 
Applicant was unemployed from October 2013 to November 2014.4 He received 
a refund from state B for the state taxes that had erroneously been paid to state B. He 
used the refund to sustain himself during that period of unemployment rather than 
paying it to State A.5 In his SCA, Applicant stated that he was to begin a payment plan 
to pay state A of $305 per month starting on December 15, 2014. He did not do so. 
Then, a few months later in his PSI, he told the OPM investigator that he would start 
making payments in that same amount in February 2015.6 He did not do so. Instead, 
Applicant testified that he made an agreement with state A on August 9, 2017, the day 
before the hearing. State A purportedly promised Applicant that he would be provided 
with releases of the tax liens against him when he returned to the state tax office on the 
day after the hearing. Applicant has yet to produce the releases. He testified that he 
filed his 2013, 2014, and 2015 state tax returns on May 3, 2017.7 
 
In his May 6, 2016 Answers to Interrogatories (GE 3), Applicant explained that 
he’s always had his uncle, (WN), prepare his income tax returns. He testified that he 
had provided his uncle with a SPOA to prepare Applicant’s income tax returns for over 
20 years.8 His uncle had been trained as a tax preparer by H&R Block. Applicant 
described this 70-year old uncle as reclusive, prone to panic attacks, and possibly 
suffering from dementia. “Being overwhelmed with this financial mess, has compelled 
me to hire a tax lawyer . . .  to help me sort it out.”9 He provided no explanation about 
services provided or work product from the tax lawyer. Applicant also explained that he 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 79. 
 
5 Tr. at 79. 
 
6 Tr. at 80. 
 
7 AE B, Tr. at 37 and 82. 
 
8 AE C, Tr. at 40 - 43. 
 
9 GE 3, p. 10.  
 
4 
 
 
had voluntarily paid half of his 26 year retirement pay (from USAF), or $1,400 each 
month, to his ex-wife for seven years as alimony, but this was not recognized as a 
proper deduction by the IRS because it was not court ordered spousal support in the 
divorce decree.10 Applicant had added in another $1,000 per month in child support 
payments for his son, and $220 a month for his daughter’s automobile loan.11  
 
After SOR ¶ 1.a was withdrawn, the SOR alleged two delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $55,000 for the state and federal back taxes owed. Department Counsel 
moved to amend these two allegations to conform to the evidence presented at the 
hearing: The motion was allowed. SOR ¶ 1.b now states that Applicant is indebted to 
state A in the approximate amount of $43,539 (vice $9,395) for TY’s 2011–2014 (vice 
TY’s 2011 and 2012). SOR ¶ 1.c now states that Applicant is indebted to the federal 
government in the approximate amount of $11,709 (vice $5,677) for TY’s 2011 and 
2012 (vice TY 2012). This motion was granted.12 It did not change Applicant’s 
admissions to both of these amended SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant submitted a bank statement that reflected a deposit of $20,582 into his 
account from the Veterans Administration (VA) on May 11, 2017.13 He testified that he 
received this money as a lump sum for the period during which the VA processed his 
VA disability claim. Applicant is 80% disabled.14 He used this money to immediately 
pay-off: credit card debts, Home Depot, USAA and his daughter’s student loan.15 He did 
not use it for his delinquent tax debts that were alleged in the SOR because he wanted 
to focus on the high-interest debts first. He did submit evidence that he had made a few 
payments on his federal tax debt in the form of a payment confirmation16at the hearing 
and by post-hearing submissions.  
 
Applicant testified that he was back in the United States working for a different 
contractor from November 2014 to October 2015.17 Yet, he took no action to resolve his 
income tax delinquencies. He stated it was his fault and “I should have been more 
proactive.”18 At the time of the hearing, the balance owed to state A was $43,539, and 
                                                          
10 AE E and F. 
 
11 GE 3, p. 10-11. 
 
12 Tr. at 29. 
 
13 AE H. 
 
14 AE E and F 
 
15 Tr. at 56.  
 
16 AE I. 
 
17 Tr. at 94. 
 
18 Tr. at 63. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant claimed to be making monthly payments of $838.19 The balance owed to the 
federal government was $11,709, and he claimed to be making payments of $184 per 
month.20 He testified that he had already made four payments to the IRS totaling 
$1,800. 
 
 The record was left open until August 24, 2017 so that Applicant could provide a 
list of specifically requested documents including: the promised releases of state A tax 
liens, IRS tax transcripts, a letter from Applicant’s uncle (WN) explaining where he filed 
the income tax returns that he supposedly filed, and producing copies of exactly what 
he filed.21 Applicant submitted post-hearing documentation that was not responsive. An 
affidavit from uncle (WN) was cryptic and did not answer specific questions posed. Bank 
statements showed five payments totaling $2,600 made to the U.S. Treasury from 
January 2017 to July 2017 and a payment of $111 to state A in July 2017. He also 
produced an IRS letter establishing a payment plan requiring Applicant to make monthly 
payments of $184 starting on January 2017; a Joint Civilian Service Commendation 
Award;22 some medical records showing his [medical] diagnosis in 2005; a performance 
evaluation; and some newspaper articles about his impressive accomplishments in his 
job overseas.  
 
Applicant had no problems with taxes prior to deploying as a civilian contractor in 
2011. He needs a security clearance for his job and career. His monthly take-home pay 
is $8,000, plus another $3,000 each month from his retirement and disability pay.23 He 
has approximately $8,000 in discretionary funds left over each month after paying his 
expenses.24 He also pays approximately $500 a month to support his elderly mother 
and disabled brother.25 He provided no evidence of financial counseling or debt 
consolidation services. Applicant provided a list of civilian and military awards and 
decorations reflecting over 30 years of distinguished service to the nation including 
multiple overseas deployments as a senior noncommissioned officer.  
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
                                                          
19 Tr. at 69. 
 
20 Tr. at 71. 
 
21 Tr. at 100 – 102. 
 
22 AE M. 
 
23 Tr. at 72. 
 
24 Tr. at 96. 
 
25 Tr. at 74. 
 
 
6 
 
 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
 
7 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual federal, state or local income taxes as required.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his SCA, 
clearance interview and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.26 Applicant has not met that burden. He exercised poor 
judgment in relying on his elderly and infirm uncle to prepare his tax returns, even after 
Applicant was aware that it was a problem. Similarly, he demonstrated poor judgment 
and prioritization by using his lump sum payment of over $20,000 to pay off various 
other debts, but not the tax delinquencies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
26 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
8 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with appropriate tax authority to 
file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant was overseas continuously for two years preceding the hearing. He 
was isolated and had communication problems with his uncle who had a SPOA to 
prepare his tax returns. To some extent, these conditions were beyond his control. 
However, he has not produced relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He broached the delinquent income 
tax debts in his SCA in 2014. He discussed this obvious concern with the OPM 
investigator at his clearance interview in January 2015. Yet, more than two years later, 
he has not resolved these issues. Applicant has not met his burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He has made some 
modest progress pursuant to payment plans with state A and the IRS. However, these 
efforts were only commenced in 2017 for taxes owed for TY’s 2011–2014. In short, his 
response has been too little, too late. He produced scant substantiating documents 
even after being specifically requested to do so at the hearing. The delinquent tax debts 
alleged in the SOR have not been resolved. AG ¶ 20(g) applies only partially. 
Otherwise, the mitigating conditions enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant had a distinguished military 
career of over 26 years, including multiple deployments in war zones. He received 
numerous medals and awards including the Meritorious Service Medal. He also 
acquitted himself well during crises in a war zone as a civilian contractor. He has made 
significant contributions to DOD for over three decades. Most importantly, Applicant has 
not addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:                                    Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:                    Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
