 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00536 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Foreign preference security concerns are not established, and foreign influence 
security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). Applicant responded to the SOR on May 5, 2017, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on June 5, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for July 19, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 26, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through K, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Israel. The request was not admitted in evidence but was included in the record 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative 
notice of the facts contained in HE I. The facts are summarized in the written request 
and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is that, while a 
close ally and trading partner of the United States, Israel has a significant documented 
history of illegally importing U.S. classified information and controlled technologies. The 
threat of terrorist attacks in Israel is an ongoing concern. A U.S. State Department travel 
warning is in effect for Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza. Gaza is under the control of 
Hamas, a U.S. Government-designated foreign-terrorist organization. The government 
of Israel considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship to be Israeli citizens for 
immigration and other legal purposes. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He was born in 
Israel. He has bachelor’s and master’s degrees, which were awarded in Israel. He also 
has a doctorate from a U.S. university. He is married with two minor children.1 
  
 Applicant’s grandparents were Holocaust survivors. His mother was born in 
Bulgaria. She moved with her parents to Israel when she was young. She is a dual 
citizen of Bulgaria and Israel. Applicant’s father is deceased. Applicant came to the 
United States with his parents as a child and spent about five years here. He returned to 
Israel, spent the rest of his childhood there, and performed his mandatory military 
service. He came to the United States in 2002 to attend graduate school. He remained 
as a permanent resident and became a U.S. citizen in 2014, while retaining his Israeli 
citizenship.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Israel. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen and an Israeli 
citizen. Their two children were born in the United States. They do not have Israeli 
citizenships.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 42-43, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 42, 46-47, 51, 54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s mother, brother, and half-sister are residents of Israel. His mother 
went to college in the United States and is a retired teacher. His brother, like his mother, 
is a dual Israeli-Bulgarian citizen. He is involved in medical research. His half-sister was 
born in the United States. She is a dual U.S.-Israeli citizen. She is a student.4  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are Israeli citizens. His mother-in-law 
is retired and lives in Israel. His father-in-law is an engineer in the private sector living in 
a European country.5 
 
 Applicant’s uncle is a dual Israeli-Bulgarian citizen and a resident of Israel. 
Applicant owns a number of investment properties in the United States. He and his 
uncle jointly invested in one property. That property has been sold, and Applicant does 
not currently have a business relationship with his uncle. None of Applicant’s family 
members have any direct connection to the Israeli government.6 
 
 Applicant has about $10,000 in a retirement account in Israel from before he 
moved to the United States. He has not liquidated the account because, like U.S. 
retirement accounts, there is a penalty for early withdrawal. He owns land in Israel 
valued at about $40,000. He had a non-combat injury when he was serving in the Israeli 
military. He receives a disability payment of about $100 per month. Applicant’s and his 
wife’s gross income was $737,802 in 2016. Their net worth is more than $2.4 million.7 
 
 Applicant has a U.S. passport, which he uses to travel. He also has an Israeli 
passport, which he used to enter Israel. Applicant has no plan to move back to Israel. 
He filed a request to renounce his Israeli citizenship. He expressed his undivided loyalty 
to the United States, which he considers his home. He stated simply, “I’m an 
American.”8 
 
 Applicant reported his Israeli passport, foreign family members, and foreign 
assets on his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted 
in October 2015. His disability payments are not dependent upon his Israeli citizenship.9 
 
Applicant submitted numerous documents and letters attesting to his excellent 
job performance. He is praised for his trustworthiness, honesty, high morals, family 
values, work ethic, and integrity.10 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 33-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 36-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. 33-40, 44, 47-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE B. 
 
7 Tr. at 23-27, 37-38, 50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 18-23, 44-45, 50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE C, D. 
 
9 Tr. at 23; GE 1. 
 
10 AE G-K. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant has family members, including in-laws, who are citizens and residents 
of Israel. He has about $10,000 in a retirement account in Israel, and he receives about 
$100 per month in disability payments based on his non-combat injury while serving in 
the Israeli military. Israel is a close ally of the United States, but it also has a significant 
documented history of illegally importing U.S. classified information and controlled 
technologies. The potential for terrorist violence exists in Israel.  
 
6 
 
Applicant’s foreign contacts and financial interests create a potential conflict of 
interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e), and 
7(f) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
  Applicant’s business relationship with his uncle ended when they sold the U.S. 
property that they bought together. SOR ¶ 1.i is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Israel. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.11  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
7 
 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen. His wife and two children live in the United 
States, but he still has family in Israel, including his mother, brother, half-sister, and 
mother-in-law. He expressed his undivided loyalty to the United States, stating simply, 
“I’m an American.” 
I find that Applicant’s ties to Israel are outweighed by his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. His closest family, life, home, majority of 
assets, and professional career are in the United States. I find that it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
United States and the interests of Israel. There is no conflict of interest, because 
Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable.  
Applicant’s assets in Israeli, including his disability payments, are small in 
comparison with his U.S. assets, and could not be used effectively to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure him. AG ¶ 8(f) is applicable. 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen’s exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; and 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law. 
 
 Applicant reported his Israeli passport, foreign family members, and foreign 
assets on his SF 86. His disability payments are not dependent upon his Israeli 
citizenship or in violation of U.S. law. 
 
 The concern under AG ¶ 9 is that “[f]oreign involvement raises concerns about 
an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it.” There is no evidence that 
Applicant’s foreign involvement is “in conflict with U.S. national interests” or that he 
acted to conceal it. I find there are no applicable disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 10 
and no general concerns under AG ¶ 9. Foreign preference security concerns are not 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
credible testimony and strong character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude foreign 
preference security concerns are not established, and foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
