 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 17-01470 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 22, 2016. 
On June 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 31, 2017. He denied all of the SOR 
allegations as “paid” except for the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.g, which he conceded was for 
back child support. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 24, 2017. The case was assigned 
to me on August 28, 2017. On September 12, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for September 26, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, 
which is a credit bureau report dated September 25, 2017. It was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 4, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He took some college courses, but did not obtain a 
degree. Applicant is pending employment by a federal contractor depending on his 
ability to obtain a security clearance. He has been unemployed for four short periods 
from 2012 to 2014.  Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army from 2000 to 2005, 
and in the National Guard from 2005 to 2012. He earned the rank of Sergeant. He was 
deployed to Afghanistan in 2008 – 2009 in support of Operation Enduring Freedom and 
he received numerous awards and decorations including two Army Commendation 
Medals and two Army Achievement Medals. He was married in 2000 and divorced in 
2002. Applicant has four sons, ages 8, 9, 13, and 19. He fell behind on his child support 
payments because he was unemployed intermittently. Applicant typically paid $550 
each month in child support for the three boys that were not living with him.  
  
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $40,000, 
including the child-support arrearage in the amount of $9,071 alleged at SOR ¶1.g. The 
SOR alleged in ¶ 1.a that Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $29,833. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that this was paid. I left the record open until October 2, 2017 for Applicant to 
produce evidence that this and his five delinquent medical debts were paid. At the 
hearing, Applicant testified credibly that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a resulted from delays by 
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) reimbursing him for tuition costs under the GI 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 22, 2016 
security clearance application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on January 11, 
2017. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Bill. (Tr. 24-25) Applicant took college courses online for approximately 18 months in 
2012 - 2013. Somehow, the paperwork submitted to the VA fell through the cracks. 
Eventually, the VA paid him. (Tr. 29) In his post-hearing submissions, Applicant 
included a bank statement showing that this debt has now been settled for the reduced 
amount of $8,200.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f are for delinquent medical debts that Applicant incurred 
in 2015 – 2016 when he had two knee surgeries for injuries sustained in Afghanistan. 
(Tr. 32) However, he could not get into the VA hospital. He is a 70% disabled veteran, 
and contends that these should have been covered by the VA. In his post-hearing 
submissions, Applicant included a bank statement showing that the delinquent medical 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 1.e have all been paid in full. Further, he produced 
evidence that he has entered into a payment plan of $100 per month in SOR 1.f, and he 
is making continuous payments on the plan. These debts are not reflected on his latest 
credit report. (AE A)  
  
SOR ¶ 1.g is for the alleged child-support arrearage in the amount of $9,071. 
Applicant testified that his normal child support payments each month were in the 
amount of $500. (Tr. 36) He pays a little extra each month now. So, it is up to $550 a 
month. (Tr. 44) Applicant has an allotment set up that it is taken directly from his pay 
check, and he is up to date on child support payments. (Tr. 37) Applicant submitted 
post-hearing documents including a bank statement showing the debit each month for 
child support payments.   
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay is presently about $1,000 per week, from his new job 
where he earns $24.50 per hour, for a 40-hour week, plus another $1,400 a month for 
his disability. He has not received financial counseling or debt consolidation services. 
He expects to have any remaining delinquent debts settled soon.   
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
 
4 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.            
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview, and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.3 Applicant has met that burden. Most of the delinquent 
debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant suffered through periods of unemployment and he has been 
underemployed awaiting his security clearance. Arguably, these conditions were 
beyond his control. He has now produced relevant and responsive documentation, 
demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has met his 
burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under 
control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. He has either paid off, disputed, or made consistent payments pursuant to a plan, 
on most of his delinquent debts. He produced letters and bank statements to confirm 
that six of the seven delinquencies alleged in his SOR have been resolved, and he is 
making payments on the other one at SOR ¶ 1.f. The mitigating conditions enumerated 
above apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant testified credibly and persuasively 
that his finances are now under control. Most importantly, Applicant has addressed the 
specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to resolve them. He has 
met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He is 
gainfully employed and managing his financial affairs. The record evidence leaves me 
 
7 
 
 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:             For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
