 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00281 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 28, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on July 7, 2017, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to 
the FORM. Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 14, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 23, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 50 years old this month. He graduated from high school in 1986. 
Applicant has been employed as a test-technician lV by a federal contractor since 
September 1996. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1988 to 1992 and 
received an honorable discharge. He had a previous clearance while he was on active 
duty. He was married in 1995 and divorced in 2015. He reports two children, born in 
2006 and 2010. Applicant reports in section 26 of his May 2016 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions or security clearance application (SCA)2 that he had filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions in July 2013, and in July 2015. The latter Chapter 13 
plan included over $30,000 in delinquent student loans that were deferred for five years. 
The Chapter 13 repayment plan is scheduled to be completed in 2020 when the 
bankruptcy will be discharged.  
 
In addition to the bankruptcies, Applicant reported delinquent debts in section 26 
of his SCA including the student loans and a credit-card debt, which was included in his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition filed on July 15, 2013. The 2013 bankruptcy plan 
included approximately $107,000 in debt. It required Applicant to pay $672 a month to 
the bankruptcy trustee for five years. Applicant made these payments from July 2013 to 
June 2015. However, when his divorce became final in 2015, the court ordered his 
child-support payments to increase from $700 per month to $1,500 per month, in 
addition to the $672 each month to the trustee. Applicant could not keep up with these 
payments and he filed a motion for a voluntary dismissal of his bankruptcy petition in 
June 2015. His motion was granted and Applicant filed another Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition one month later in July 2015. His payments to the trustee were reduced to $452 
per month under the new plan.   
 
Although Applicant did not disclose it, he filed an earlier Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition on October 1, 2003.3 That was dismissed on October 24, 2007 because 
Applicant failed to make all payments as required to the bankruptcy trustee. His recent 
chapter 13 plan consolidated approximately $94,689 of Applicant’s unsecured debts 
including federal income taxes4 owed from 2007 – 2012, utilities, medical accounts, 
credit cards and personal loans. Although, the delinquent federal income taxes are not 
alleged in the SOR, they will be considered as part of my whole-person analysis of 
Applicant. The bankruptcy also included the two student loans and other delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. Recently, the trustee filed yet another motion to dismiss for 
[applicant’s] failure to make payments on April 11, 2017. The bankruptcy court’s ruling 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 12, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 5) and the summary of his personal subject interview 
conducted on August 8, 2016. (Item 14) 
 
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Item 8. 
 
4 Item 11, Schedule E. 
 
3 
 
 
was reserved.5 Although, Applicant made 18 consecutive payments to the trustee under 
the repayment plan, it is unclear whether he will be able to cure the default and continue 
to make payments pursuant to his obligations under the bankruptcy plan.  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to the strain following his January 2013 
marital separation.6 He has admitted all of the SOR allegations, including the three 
bankruptcy petitions, in his March 29, 2017 answer. The alleged delinquent debts total 
over $68,000. The bulk of his delinquent debts are from the two student loans totaling 
$63,000. Other than his bankruptcy petitions, Applicant has taken no actions to resolve 
these financial issues. He did not provide any explanations or substantiating 
documentation with his answer, and he did not respond to the FORM.    
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.7 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
5 Items 10 and 13. 
 
6 Items 5 and 14. 
 
7 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and othisevidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rathisthan actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, 
othisissues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, 
mental health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or 
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater 
risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to 
generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of 
income is also a security concern insofar as it may result from criminal 
activity, including espionage.  
 
 
5 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and his clearance interview of August 2016. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.8 Applicant has not met that 
burden. None of the delinquent debts have been adequately addressed with 
corroborating documentation.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
                                                          
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured a separation and divorce. Arguably, these conditions were 
beyond his control. He has made some efforts to resolve his alleged delinquent debts 
by including them in his latest bankruptcy plan. However, he is now in default in making 
payments as agreed to the bankruptcy trustee, for the third time. His efforts are 
disingenuous. He has produced no documentation to show that he is now in compliance 
with his 2015 bankruptcy plan, either with his answer or in response to the FORM. 
Applicant had financial problems going back to at least 2003 when he filed his first 
bankruptcy petition. He owes federal income taxes going back to 2007. He did not 
separate from his wife until 2013. He produced no evidence to show efforts to resolve 
his delinquent debts prior to filing bankruptcy petitions in 2013 and 2015. His financial 
issues are ongoing and recent. He has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to 
show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred 
under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He did not meet his burden of proof 
and persuasion. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply.  
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was necessary for 
him to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in 
the SOR. (FORM at 9) Aside from Applicant’s half-hearted bankruptcy plans, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. He did not describe financial counseling or provide 
his budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 9) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Applicant served honorably in the armed forces 
during time of war. He has maintained employment since 1996. However, most 
importantly, Applicant has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. He is delinquent on paying 
federal income taxes and other debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:                        Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
