 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01397 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole a. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on December 2, 2016. 
(Item 4) After reviewing the results of the background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security 
clearance. On May 23, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 5, 2017. He admitted the four allegations 
of delinquent debt. He provided documentation to show one of the debts was paid (SOR 
1.b), and that he has a payment plan for another debt (SOR 1.c). He requested that the 
matter be decided on the written record. (Item 2) 
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on June 26, 2017. 
(Item 6) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on July 5, 2017, 
and he was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely replied to the FORM 
by providing a one-page document concerning a payment plan from one of the 
creditors. The reply to the FORM was received by DOHA on August 8, 2017. I was 
assigned the case on October 23, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial 
or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective on or 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility under the new AGs.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
administrative judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility of 
the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I 
considered information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 35 years old. He graduated from high school in May 2000, and he received 
a technical school diploma in May 2001. He served on active duty in the Army from 
September 2001 until December 2015, when he received an honorable discharge as a 
sergeant (E-5). There is some indication in the record that Applicant was deployed while 
on active duty. There is no indication in the record that Applicant was granted eligibility 
for access to classified information while on active duty. He still serves in the Army 
Reserve. After Applicant left the Army in December 2015, he was unemployed until 
August 2016. He did not receive unemployment compensation while unemployed. He 
 
3 
 
 
started working with his present employer as a heavy equipment technician in August 
2016. He first married in September 2005 and divorced in September 2011. He married 
his present wife in June 2013. He has a child and two step-children. (Item 3, e-QIP, 
dated September 2, 2016; Item 4, PSI, dated December 2, 2016)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and the PSI and a credit report (Item 5, dated April 28, 2017) 
confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a charged off credit card debt for 
$11,735 (SOR 1.a); a utility debt for $770 (SOR 1.b); a credit card account in collection 
for $1,155 (SOR 1.c); and a television service equipment debt for $96 (SOR 1.d). 
Applicant admitted all of the debts in his answer to the SOR. The amount of delinquent 
debt is in excess of $13,756. The overwhelming majority of the debt is the credit card 
debt at SOR 1.a.  
 
 The credit card at SOR 1.a was opened in November 2010, and became 
delinquent in 2012 as the result of the divorce from his first wife. Applicant attributes his 
failure to resolve the debt to his divorce and unemployment after his discharge from the 
Army. He noted this debt on the e-QIP, stating that it was the result of his divorce. (Item 
3, e-QIP, dated September 2, 2016) In the PSI Applicant stated that he had no income 
while unemployed. He and his wife only had her income to pay debts. His lack of 
income was the reason for his delinquent debt. (Item 4, PSI, dated December 2, 2016, 
at 4)  
 
 Applicant, in response to the FORM, provided a settlement agreement with the 
SOR 1.a creditor reached in June 2017. The settlement agreement requires Applicant to 
pay $4,108 by July 2, 2018, and meet certain other requirements. (Item 7, Response to 
FORM, Letter, dated June 6, 2017) Applicant still has approximately seven months to 
meet the requirements. 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant provided a receipt for payment of the debt 
at SOR 1.b. Applicant provided documentation that he has a payment plan in place with 
the creditor for the debt at SOR 1.c. The plan requires five monthly payments of 
$192.43 starting in July 2017. Applicant did not need to make a payment until after he 
responded to the FORM.  
 
 In his SOR response, Applicant noted that the debt at SOR 1.d has been paid. In 
the PSI, Applicant stated that he had no knowledge of the debt but would inquire about 
the debt. The debt seems to be for television service equipment. If he owed the debt, he 
would pay it. He did not provide documentation of return of the equipment or payment of 
this debt. (Item 4, PSI, dated December 2, 2016, at 4)  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. An individual 
who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
5 
 
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
 A credit report and Applicant’s admissions in the response to the SOR confirm 
his delinquent debts. Adverse information in a credit report and an admission by 
Applicant meets the substantial evidence standard to establish financial delinquency. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant provided proof that he paid the debt at SOR 1.b. He provided 
settlement agreements for two of the debts (SOR 1.a and 1.c). The time for him to make 
payments under the agreements had not been reached by the time Applicant replied to 
the FORM. The Government established the adverse financial issues, so the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. I considered the information and 
documents Applicant provided in mitigation. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(a), and 20(b) apply. Applicant incurred the 
debts while on active duty, and he then had a long period of unemployment after his 
discharge from the Army. Available evidence shows that he was gainfully employed in 
the Army until December 2015, and then unemployed for eight months until August 
2016. He did not receive unemployment compensation. His wife was employed when he 
was unemployed. He did not provide any information on his present finances or salary. 
  
 Applicant’s delinquent debt was mainly caused by his leaving the Army and 
unemployment. He has been gainfully employed since August 2016. He reached out to 
his creditors and paid one debt and has settlement or payment agreements on two 
other debts. The causes of his debt are unlikely to recur and were largely beyond his 
control. He acted reasonably under the circumstances by paying one debt and 
contacting creditors to reach settlement or payment agreements. The file indicates that 
the fourth debt, a small debt concerning television service equipment, has been 
resolved. While the time for Applicant to report on or make payments on his agreements 
has not arrived, his payments of past debts indicates that he will make the required 
payments as required.  
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant did not present any 
evidence of financial counseling.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) applies. Good faith means acting in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, 
and Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful 
track record of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments 
or reduction of debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not 
a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a 
financially responsible manner. Applicant established that he has a reasonable plan to 
resolve financial problems. He has two debts remaining to pay and he has settlement or 
payment agreements in place on both debts. Applicant presented evidence of pay of the 
utility debt (SOR 1.b). The time has not arrived for Applicant to report on or make 
payments under his payment agreements. (SOR 1.a and 1.c) He presented sufficient 
information to show a good-faith effort to resolve all of his debts.  
 
 Applicant provides sufficient documentation to show proof of payments, 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, evidence 
of negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant was 
able to make stay progress to resolve his debts. There is sufficient assurance that his 
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
His reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is a strong indication that 
he will protect and safeguard classified or sensitive information. Under all these 
circumstances, Applicant mitigated the financial security concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active duty 
Army service. Applicant provided sufficient credible documentary information to 
establish that he took reasonable and responsible action to resolve his financial 
obligations. Applicant demonstrated appropriate management of his finances and 
established a record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. He has established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
