 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00212 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
While he unintentionally failed to list his delinquent debts, he intentionally failed to report 
his foreign contact on his November 2012 security clearance application. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 20, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on April 27, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on June 13, 2017. He did not respond to the Government’s FORM. 
The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 8 are admitted in evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old supervisor employed by a defense contractor stationed 
overseas since December 2003. He obtained a high-school diploma in 1982, and he 
subsequently attended college until 1983, but he did not earn a degree. He served 
honorably in the U.S. military from October 1983 until he retired in November 2003. He 
was previously married from 1984 to 2011, and he has two adult children.2     
 
 The SOR alleges a judgment for $1,861 entered against Applicant in 2014, a 
2015 mortgage foreclosure, and six delinquent consumer debts totaling $26,296. It also 
alleges in ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified his November 2012 security clearance 
application when he failed to disclose a foreign contact in response to section 19, and in 
¶ 2.b that he falsified his application when he failed to disclose his delinquent debts in 
response to section 26. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted ¶ 2.a and 
denied the remaining SOR allegations.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to his ex-wife incurring debts in his 
name, without his knowledge, while he worked overseas. He stated that after their 
divorce, she continued to incur debts in his name, without his knowledge, through a 
power of attorney. He stated that he was unaware his home was foreclosed, as he 
never asked questions about it after it was granted to his ex-wife in the divorce decree. 
He first learned of his delinquent debts through the security clearance process, as he 
was asked about them during his September 2016 subject interview. Thus, he 
unintentionally failed to report his delinquent debts in response to section 26 of his 
November 2012 security clearance application.4  
 
 Credit reports from November 2012 and June 2016 verify Applicant’s delinquent 
debts. The June 2016 credit report lists SOR ¶ 1.b as having a zero balance.5 
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the SOR that he asked his ex-wife about SOR 
¶ 1.a, then he resolved it through a wage garnishment. An April 2017 Joint Personnel 
                                                          
2 Items 4, 8. 
 
3 Items 1, 2. 
 
4 Items 2, 8. 
 
5 Items 5-6. 
 
3 
 
Adjudication System (JPAS) incident history report, reflecting a January 2017 wage 
garnishment processed by his employer for  SOR ¶ 1.a, corroborates Applicant’s 
statement.6  
 
  Applicant indicated during his September 2016 interview that he requested 
information for SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.f, and he planned to follow-up on them as soon as 
possible. He acknowledged in his response to the SOR that he has to take responsibility 
for his debts since they are in his name. He stated that he was working with a credit 
union to rebuild his credit history. Applicant has not provided evidence of any efforts he 
may have taken to repay or otherwise resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.h.7 
 
 Applicant indicated during his September 2016 interview that he thought his 
finances were stable as he tried to avoid using credit when possible, timely paid his 
bills, and budgeted his money. He was surprised to learn that his ex-wife incurred debts 
in his name, without his knowledge, then failed to pay them. He acknowledged that his 
divorce occurred as a result of his separation from his now ex-wife, as he put his job 
before his family and only visited home once a year between 2004 and 2011. Applicant 
previously experienced a similar situation in August 2000. He learned then, for the first 
time, that his now ex-wife had not properly managed their finances during a period 
when he was the family’s primary breadwinner. He took action in 2001 to resolve their 
delinquent debts.8  
 
 Applicant intentionally failed to disclose a foreign contact in response to section 
19 of his November 2012 security clearance application. Above his signature, he 
certified: 
 
My statements on this form, and on any attachments to it, are true, 
complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are 
made in good faith. . . . I understand that a knowing and willful false 
statement on this form can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both 
(18 U.S.C 1001). I understand that intentionally withholding, 
misrepresenting, or falsifying information may have a negative effect on 
my security clearance, employment prospects, or job status, up to and 
including denial or revocation of my security clearance, or my removal and 
debarment from Federal service.9   
 
 Applicant initially indicated during his September 2016 subject interview that he 
did not disclose his foreign contact on his application because he did not think of her 
when he completed it. He then admitted that he completed the application with his then-
wife’s help, and he did not want her to ask him questions about his infidelity with his 
                                                          
6 Items 2, 3, 8. 
 
7 Items 2, 8. 
 
8 Items 7, 8. 
 
9 Items 2, 4, 8.  
 
 
4 
 
foreign contact. He stated that he wished to change his answer to section 19 to “Yes.” 
He regretted not disclosing his foreign contact, stated that he did not think about the 
consequences, and stated that he would not engage in such behavior in the future. In 
his response to the SOR, however, he stated that since he had worked overseas for so 
long, he did not think of his friend as a foreign contact.10  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
10 Items 2, 4, 8. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to his ex-wife incurring debts in his 
name, without his knowledge, while he worked overseas. He stated that after their 
divorce, she continued to incur debts in his name, without his knowledge, through a 
power of attorney. He stated that he was unaware his home was foreclosed, as he 
never asked questions about it after it was granted to his ex-wife in the divorce decree. 
He first learned of his delinquent debts through the security clearance process, as he 
was asked about them during his September 2016 subject interview.  
 
Applicant previously experienced a similar situation in 2000, in which he learned 
that his now ex-wife had incurred delinquent debts without his knowledge. He then took 
action in 2001 to resolve their delinquent debts. In 2016, he was surprised to learn that 
she again incurred delinquent debts without his knowledge. But, he acknowledged that 
their divorce occurred due to their separation, as he only visited home once yearly when 
he worked overseas between 2004 and 2011, and he put his job before his family. 
Given his now ex-wife’s history of incurring delinquent debts, and Applicant’s knowing 
lack of involvement in their affairs, conditions beyond Applicant’s control only partially 
contributed to his current financial problems. In addition, Applicant has not shown that 
he acted responsibly under his circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
Applicant resolved SOR ¶ 1.a through a wage garnishment, and the June 2016 
credit report lists a zero balance for SOR ¶ 1.b. I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b for Applicant. 
Applicant indicated that he intended to look into SOR debts ¶¶ 1.c to 1.f, and he 
planned to follow-up on them as soon as possible. He acknowledged that he has to take 
responsibility for his debts since they are in his name. He stated that he was working 
with a credit union to rebuild his credit history. He has not provided evidence of any 
efforts he may have taken to repay or otherwise resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.h. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and 
they continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. His financial problems are not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e) do not apply to the unmitigated debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.h.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant unintentionally failed to list his delinquent debts in response to section 
26 of his security clearance application. His ex-wife incurred the debts in his name, 
without his knowledge, while he worked overseas. After their divorce, she continued to 
incur debts in his name, without his knowledge, through a power of attorney. He was 
unaware his home was foreclosed, as he never asked questions about it after it was 
granted to his ex-wife in the divorce decree. He first learned of his delinquent debts 
through the security clearance process, as he was asked about them during his 
September 2016 subject interview. AG ¶¶ 16(a) does not apply to SOR ¶ 2.b, and I find 
SOR ¶ 2.b for Applicant.      
Applicant intentionally failed to disclose his foreign contact in response to section 
19 of his November 2012 security clearance application. AG ¶¶ 16(a) is applicable to 
SOR ¶ 2.a.   
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
is potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. 
 Applicant only corrected his response to section 19 of his November 2012 
security clearance application after he was confronted about his false response during 
his September 2016 interview. He admitted that he did not disclose his foreign contact 
because he completed the application with his then-wife’s help, and he did not want her 
to ask him questions about his infidelity with his foreign contact. He regretted not 
disclosing his foreign contact, stated that he did not think about the consequences, and 
stated that he would not engage in such behavior in the future. But in his response to 
 
8 
 
the SOR, he stated that since he had worked overseas for so long, he did not think of 
his friend as a foreign contact. His corrections were not prompt and did not occur before 
being confronted with the facts. He continued to minimize his intentional falsification in 
his response to the SOR. AG ¶ 17(a) is not applicable to SOR ¶ 2.a.     
 
Applicant certified that he was aware that he was committing a criminal offense 
punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, and that falsifying information could cause 
him to be denied a security clearance and lose his job. Despite those certifications, he 
decided to falsify his security clearance application. I am unable to determine that the 
conduct is unlikely to recur. It continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find that personal conduct security concerns 
remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F and Guideline E in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant served honorably in the U.S. military from October 1983 until he retired 
in November 2003. He has worked for a defense contractor stationed overseas since 
December 2003. 
 
However, Applicant’s financial delinquencies remain unresolved and he 
intentionally falsified his security clearance application. He failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
 
9 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
