 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00772 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 17, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2017. The 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 26, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for August 17, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled.  
  
The Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 1. Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection.  
Applicant requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Germany. 
The request was not admitted in evidence but was appended to the record as HE 2. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N, which were 
admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
At Applicant’s request and with no objection from the Government, I left the 
record open until August 31, 2017 for additional documentation. Applicant timely 
provided documentation, which I marked as AE O. The Government’s email indicating 
no objection to Applicant’s post-hearing submission was appended to the record as HE 
3, and AE O was admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations.2 She is a 29-year-old native-born U.S. 
citizen, employed as a consultant by a defense contractor since February 2016. She 
was first granted a DOD security clearance in 2014. She was granted a security 
clearance by the U.S. Department of State in 2009. She obtained a high-school diploma 
in 2006, a bachelor’s degree in 2010, and two master’s degrees in 2015. She is 
pursuing a graduate certificate and anticipates receiving it in 2018. As of the hearing 
date, she was engaged to marry, in September 2017, a German-born citizen residing in 
Estonia, and she did not have any children.3 
 
Applicant’s then-fiancée, now-husband, is 31 years old. She met and dated him 
in 2004, when he was a foreign exchange student at Applicant’s high-school for one 
year. Upon his return to Germany, they continued dating for two years. They ended their 
relationship when Applicant went to college in 2006. When Applicant lived and studied 
in Europe as part of her master’s studies from August 2014 to June 2015, she rekindled 
contact with him when she was in Berlin in late 2014. They resumed dating in 2015. 
Since she completed her studies in Europe in June 2015, she returned to the United 
States and their relationship has been one of long-distance. They got engaged in 
August 2016. He has visited Applicant in the United States four times yearly. She visited 
him in Germany twice in 2015 and in 2016. She also visited him in Estonia twice in 2015 
and in 2017.4 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s response to the SOR.  
 
3 Tr. at 17-27, 34, 66-67, 79; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-39, 50-55, 68-71; GE 1; AEs J, N. 
 
3 
 
He is a captain in the Germany military, assigned to a NATO defense center in 
Estonia. He works alongside NATO members and allies, to include the United States, 
as an electrical engineer and in matters related to cyber defense. He holds security 
clearances with NATO and the German military.5 
 
He joined the German military at the age of 18, initially to serve his compulsory 
two-year service. He then chose to sign a 12-year contract with the German military at 
the end of his compulsory service, primarily because of the educational benefits he 
would receive in exchange. His contract ends in June 2019, and he does not have any 
intentions to re-enlist. Applicant is unaware of any benefit he would receive from the 
Germany military at the end of his contract. Applicant stated that he decided in 2011, 
before they resumed dating, not to re-enlist. When his contract ends, they intend to 
settle and raise a family in the United States, and they do not have any intentions of 
living in Germany. She plans to sponsor his move to the United States, and he intends 
to seek permanent residency. He hopes to get a private sector job in the United States 
in his areas of expertise.6 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Germany. They are in the German military. Her father-in-law has served in the German 
military for 34 years and is a lieutenant colonel. He works in radio communications and 
holds security clearances with NATO and the German military. He intends to retire in 
2025. Applicant is unsure whether he would receive retirement benefits from the 
German military upon his retirement. She sees him during the holidays and they 
converse on occasion. They do not discuss work. She stated that she is not close to her 
father-in-law.7  
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law is a lieutenant in the German military. He chose to 
serve in the German military to receive schooling. He studied medicine at a university in 
Germany. He works as a military neuroscience physician. He has access to patient 
protected healthcare data, but Applicant does not believe he has ever held a security 
clearance with the German military. His wife is also a lieutenant in the Germany military, 
and she expects to complete her studies to also become a physician in December 2017. 
She also has access to patient protected healthcare data, and she has never held a 
security clearance with the German military. Applicant is the godmother to their second 
child, age two. Applicant sees her brother-in-law and his spouse during the holidays and 
they talk sporadically. She stated that her husband is not close to his brother. They see 
each other during the holidays and talk to each other once monthly. She has not given 
any gifts to her brother-in-law or his family, but her husband has done so on their 
behalf.8 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 27-39, 44, 55-61; GE 1; AEs A, B, K. 
 
6 Tr. at 27-39, 44, 57-61, 67-72, 78-80; GE 1; AEs A, D, O, N. 
 
7 Tr. at 39-44, 61-62, 67, 70-75; AEs E, F, L, N. 
 
8 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 41-44, 62-66, 70-71, 73-74, 76-77; AEs G, H, N. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s friend, a 29-year-old citizen and resident of Germany, serves in the 
German military as a commissioned officer. He is a first lieutenant in the reserve. He 
does not hold a security clearance with the German military. They met when they were 
classmates in the same graduate program; he was in the German military when they 
met. She last saw him in June 2015. She had monthly electronic contact with him from 
July 2013 to June 2015. Since then, they have had sporadic contact on social media. 
She is unaware of what he does.9  
 
Applicant’s gross monthly income is $4,800, or $64,000 yearly. She does not 
own any property, but her assets in the United States are valued at $50,000. She 
expects to inherit $500,000 from her parents. She did not intend to have a shared bank 
account with her husband because she preferred to keep her bank accounts in the 
United States. His gross monthly income is US $4,200. He does not own any property. 
He has stocks in a private company and owns a car. To the best of her knowledge, he is 
not expected to inherit any money from his family. They have not received any financial 
support from his family.10 
 
Applicant stated that when she and her husband resumed dating in 2015, they 
made it clear that they would not discuss the details of their careers with each other, as 
they anticipated a time when they both would have a job that would require a clearance. 
She credibly testified that she would report any attempt by anyone, to include her 
husband and her in-laws, to obtain information from her about her work. She has never 
had any security violations, she is current on her security training requirements, and she 
has abided by her employer’s reporting requirements for foreign travel. She stated that 
her honor, duty, and allegiance lie with the United States.11 
 
Applicant comes from a seven-generation family in the close-knit Adirondacks 
community, in which she remains heavily involved and desires to settle someday. She 
would never do anything to jeopardize her family’s standing in the community. Her 
parents and brother are native-born U.S. citizens and residents. Her brother served in 
the U.S. military, deployed to Iraq in 2010, and medically retired in 2015; her uncle 
currently serves in the U.S. military. She provided 15 character references from 
individuals, to include a higher-level supervisor as well as a career manager, who spoke 
of her favorably. They described her as reliable, of sound judgment, honest, and 
trustworthy. They stated that her allegiance lies with the United States. One individual 
described her family as pillars of their community.12  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 45-46, 63-65, 75-76; GE 1; AE I. 
 
10 Tr. at 18-26, 38, 43-44, 46-50, 73-75, 77-79; AEs C, M. 
 
11 Tr. at 35-38, 74-76, 79; AEs A, N. 
 
12 Tr. at 18-26, 38, 43-44, 46-50, 73-75; AE N. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
 Applicant’s husband, father-in-law, brother-in-law, and friend are citizens of 
Germany. Her husband resides in Estonia; her father-in-law, brother-in-law, and friend 
reside in Germany; all of them are in the German military. The Government did not 
present any evidence of a heightened risk with Germany, however the record 
establishes that these individuals’ ties to the German military present a heightened risk. 
These familial and social connections pose a conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
are established by their positions in the German military. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a  
 
 
7 
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of  
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s husband and his family, and Applicant’s friend, are German citizens 
serving in the German military. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the 
reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). Applicant is not close 
to her friend. She last saw him in June 2015, and they have since had only sporadic 
contact on social media. She is unaware of what he does. AG ¶ 8(c) is established as 
to Applicant’s friend. I find SOR ¶ 1.d for Applicant. 
 
While Applicant stated that she is not close to her father-in-law and she has only 
sporadic contact with her brother-in-law, she has a relationship to them through her 
husband. She talks to her in-laws and sees them during the holidays. She is also the 
godmother to her brother-in-law’s second child. While she stated that her husband and 
his brother are not close, they see each other during the holidays and talk to each other 
once monthly. Her husband has given gifts to his brother’s family on their behalf. AG ¶ 
8(c) is not established as to Applicant’s husband, father-in-law, and brother-in-law. 
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. She was raised, educated, and has worked 
in the United States.  All of her financial interests are in the United States. Her husband’s 
income comes from the German military, however, he does not own any property in 
Germany aside from a car, his stocks are in a private company, and he does not expect 
to inherit any money from his family in Germany. His contract with the German military 
ends in June 2019. He does not have any intentions to re-enlist. They intend to settle 
and raise a family in the United States, and they do not have any intentions of living in 
Germany. Applicant is extensively involved in her close-knit community in the United 
States. She would never do anything to jeopardize her family’s standing in the 
community. She has never had any security violations, she is current on her security 
training requirements, and she has abided by her employer’s reporting requirements for 
foreign travel. Her references described her as reliable, of sound judgment, honest, and 
trustworthy. She stated that her honor, duty, and allegiance lie with the United States. I 
am satisfied that Applicant met her burden to demonstrate that she would resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
