 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ADP Case No. 17-00385 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. On 
April 27, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On May 25, 2017, the Government submitted its written case. On May 31, 2017, 
Applicant received a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM). He was 
afforded 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional information. On October 16, 2017, the case 
was assigned to me. The Government exhibits, Items 1 through 8, included in the FORM, 
are admitted in evidence. 
 
  
  
 
2 
                                         
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 The SOR alleged 19 debts under financial considerations totaling over $32,000. 
Applicant admitted 16 of the allegations, totaling almost $27,000. He denied or disputed 
two allegations, and states that he is paying on one allegation. His admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old customer service representative employed by a defense 
contractor since May 2016. He seeks a public trust position in conjunction with his current 
employment. Applicant graduated from high school in June 1995. He attended a 
vocational school from September 1999 to June 2000, and was awarded a technical 
diploma. He then attended an on-line university from September 2008 to January 2010, 
and was awarded an associate’s degree in business. (Items 5, 8) Applicant has lived with 
his girlfriend since January 2016. (Item 8)   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s 19 debts consist of student loans and consumer debts.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.s) These allegations are established through the Government’s exhibits. (Items 1 – 8) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to unemployment and 
underemployment. He was unemployed from March 2010 to September 2011 and from 
November 2011 to August 2012. From October 2014 to October 2015, he worked full-
time as a bartender, and from October 2015 to March 2016, his hours were reduced to 
part-time. Since March 2016, he has not been assigned a shift, but remains on the payroll. 
(Items 5, 8)  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties date back to at least 2010. (Items 6 – 8) Although 
he claimed he is paying on one account and disputing another, Applicant did not submit 
any documentation that he has paid or otherwise resolved these two debts or his other 
debts. Even if Applicant’s financial delinquencies were caused in large part to 
circumstances beyond his control, he did not show that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. During Applicant’s July 14, 2016 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI), he provided assurances that he would address or 
satisfy his debts. (Item 8) 
  
In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his SOR allegations. He did not 
describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days 
from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available in the 
cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to 
an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this 
FORM. As noted, Applicant did not submit evidence responsive to the FORM. 
   
Policies 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative 
guidelines implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made 
on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated this case under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 2017.2 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
                                            
2 http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4_20170608.pdf 
 
4 
                                         
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworhiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the facts 
and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant 
has been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a 
mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his long-
standing financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for 
access to sensitive information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of 
these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to 
submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial 
trustworthiness concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide 
documentation regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to 
provide such information, and in relying on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully 
establish mitigation, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns remain.  
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
