1 
 
          
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )          ISCR Case No. 17-005301 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
11/03/2017 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement and substance misuse), but he mitigated the concern under Guideline E 
(personal conduct). Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. Applicant timely 
answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
on June 14, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on June 22, 2017, and had 30 days to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did 
not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 4, is admitted without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2017.  
                                                          
1 Initially, the SOR  language referred to an ADP case. However, after investigation, it was found to be an 
ISCR case. Department Counsel amended the SOR to reflect the fact that the case is an ISCR decision.  
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 25 years old. He graduated from high school in 2010 and obtained his 
undergraduate degree in 2014. He has been employed as a staff engineer by a federal 
contractor since May 2014. He reports inactive Air Force Reserve service from August 
2010 to October 2010, and he received an honorable discharge. He has never married. 
Applicant has held a previous security clearance since August 2014.   
 
On January 8, 2015, Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application 
(SCA),3 but did not disclose in section 24 (alcohol treatment) his treatment for alcohol 
poisoning on New Year’s Eve 2012 in an emergency room. He disclosed during his 2016 
interview that he used marijuana since completing his SCA, and in the future he may use 
marijuana if he went to a concert or special event. He stated “I went to a concert and 
didn’t think about the clearance, and the second time was with his girlfriend and I was not 
thinking about it.”4.  In his Answer to the SOR dated May 3, 2017, Applicant admitted to 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-b. 
 
Applicant denied allegations under Guideline E (personal conduct) in SOR  ¶¶ 2.a, 
c, and d, with explanations. He denied falsifying his SCA because he misinterpreted the 
question in section 24 (counseling for alcohol), and denied that he drinks to intoxication  
once a month. He drinks maybe twice weekly. He stated that maybe he drinks to 
intoxication once a month and on such occasions does not allow himself to drive. He 
admitted that he was treated for alcohol poisoning once on New Year’s Eve in 2012. 
Applicant denies associating with individuals who use illegal substances. He had a friend 
in college, but he no longer associates with that person. His girlfriend lives in an area 
where marijuana is legal. He has never been diagnosed with alcohol abuse or 
dependence. 
 
 
  Policies 
 
 DOD took action in this case under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s January  8, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3) and his summary of clearance interview by a background 
investigator dated October-December 2016 ( Item 4).  
 
3 Item 3.  
 
4 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017.5 Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing 
of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
          The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG  
¶ 24:   
 
 The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
          The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
 ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and  
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse.  
 
                 Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. The latest incident 
was in 2016. He stated that he may use marijuana in the future if attending a concert. He 
stated that he did not give his security clearance a thought at the time he was using 
marijuana. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he would abstain in the future. 
 
            AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
5 
 
           (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
           (b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
      (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
     (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
     (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
                                                    
              Applicant admits it was a mistake to use marijuana while holding a security 
clearance. He fully disclosed the incidents during his investigative interview. He said he 
might use again, but also said that he will pledge to abstain from ever using it again.  He 
has not provided evidence that would allow mitigation under any of the mitigating 
conditions at this time. His marijuana use is too recent, and he seemed uncertain as to 
future use. He acknowledged not associating with an old college friend, but his girlfriend 
smokes marijuana.  Applicant knew that he held a security clearance and the impact that 
use of an illegal drug would have on such a clearance. He did not provide any letter of 
intent to abstain in the future. It is insufficient to mitigate the well-established pattern of 
illegal-drug use, particularly while possessing a security clearance. His conduct continues 
to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(b) is partially 
applicable.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure 
to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following normally will result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to 
meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, completing 
6 
 
security forms or releases, cooperation with medical or psychological 
evaluation, or polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified information. This includes but is not 
limited to, considerations of: 
 
   (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client  
             confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized - - 
             release of sensitive corporate or government protected information; 
 
   (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
   (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; . . . . 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; and 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, while 
legal there, is illegal in the United States. 
 
 Applicant denied that he deliberately falsified his SCA by not responding “yes” to 
section 24 receiving treatment for alcohol use. His explanation was credible as he had 
too much to drink on New Year’s Eve, 2012, and he was sent to the hospital for alcohol 
poisoning. He misinterpreted the question as meaning a referral for alcohol rehabilitation 
7 
 
on a long term basis.  He has no diagnosis for alcohol abuse and the poisoning that 
occurred in 2012 was an isolated incident.   There is no proof that he drinks to intoxication 
every month and he defined it as if he feels he would not allow himself to drive. During 
his interview he was honestly addressing questions that he was presented with and he 
no longer associates with his old college friend who used marijuana. The final allegations 
under personal conduct are the same as the ones alleged under drug or substance abuse. 
AG  ¶ 16(a) and (e) could arguably apply and the focus shifts to a determination of which, 
if any of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
    Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could potent ia l l y mitigate security concerns 
include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
My analysis above under administrative guideline H is the same under this 
administrative guideline E, and are herein incorporated by reference. Applicant admitted 
to his use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. As to not reporting the 2012 
alcohol poisoning, it is an isolated incident and Applicant has no alcohol diagnosis. I do 
not find that he falsified his SCA and that he has mitigated the personal conduct concerns 
under SOR 2.a. AG ¶¶ 17(c),(d) and (e)  are  enough to overcome Applicant’s  alleged 
alcohol incidents in SOR 2.b and 2.c. He has not mitigated the drug usage while holding 
a security clearance under Guideline H, but he has mitigated the falsification and 
allegations about alcohol. SOR ¶ 2.e cross-alleges under the personal conduct guideline 
the same conduct alleged under the drug involvement guideline. All of Applicant’s conduct 
causing a security concern in SOR ¶ 2.e is explicitly covered under Guideline H, and that 
conduct is sufficient to warrant revocation of his security clearance under Guideline H. 
AG ¶¶16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. Applicant’s involvement with marijuana affects his 
professional and community standing. However, this conduct does not create a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because security officials are aware 
of it.  Guidelines H and E address identical issues involving judgment, trustworthiness, 
and reliability. Guideline E concerns in SOR 2.e constitute a duplication of the concerns 
under Guideline H, and accordingly personal conduct security concerns in SOR 2.e are 
found for Applicant. 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has worked for a federal contractor 
directly supporting DOD’s mission and he held a security clearance for a number of years. 
He admitted poor judgment for the use of Marijuana in 2016, while holding a security 
clearance. He does not associate with an old college friend who used marijuana, however 
he associates with his girlfriend, a marijuana user. He did not show good judgment.  
 
Applicant did not intentionally falsify his 2015 SCA and the alcohol poisoning event 
is isolated and not recent. He disclosed his alcohol use to the investigator. His explanation 
for not answering “yes” to alcohol counseling is reasonable.  I find insufficient evidence 
to find against Applicant for personal conduct. However, as to guideline H, there has not 
been sufficient time to mitigate the incidents and Applicant has not shown firm resolve not 
to use marijuana in the future. His girlfriend still smokes marijuana. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant has acknowledged the egregiousness of his drug 
involvement while holding a security clearance. He has not met his burden of persuasion. 
The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
        
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:                        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:                Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                         FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2e:                 For Applicant  
  
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Noreen A. Lynch 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
