1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00734 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana between April 1992 and May 2016. The recentness of 
his marijuana use, combined with his inconsistent statements regarding that use, cast 
doubt on his current reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant has not mitigated Guideline 
H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) concern. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on August 26, 2016. 
On April 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on May 15, 2017, and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
2 
 
Government’s written case on May 19, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4, was sent to 
Applicant on that same day. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the 
FORM on May 25, 2017, and his Response was received by the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) within the allotted 30 days and admitted without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017. The outcome of this 
case would have been the same if decided based on the former AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old quality specialist employed by a defense contractor 
since July 2016. This is his first application for a security clearance. (GX 1.) Under 
Guideline H, the SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency 
between April 1992 and May 2016. Applicant denies this allegation. 
 
On his August 2016 e-QIP, Applicant listed his marijuana-use dates as April 1992 
to May 2016, and his frequency of use as “not often.” In his November 2016 personal 
subject interview (PSI), Applicant told the investigator that between April 1992 and May 
2016, his marijuana use, “during this span was infrequent, once every two years.” 
Applicant stated that he used marijuana exclusively with his brother, and never purchased 
it. However, in his Answer to the SOR, Applicant states that he was unemployed for two 
sustained periods, first in 1992 and again in 2016, and that it was only during these two 
periods of unemployment that he used marijuana. He further states that, “there was no 
partaking of the drug in between these dates.” (GX 1; GX 2; Answer.) 
 
Applicant states in his signed Response to the FORM, “that after reviewing the 
transcript from the interview . . . [he] absolutely agree[s] with the documented interview 
record.” He emphasizes that he has not used marijuana since May 2016, and has no 
intention of any future use. He acknowledges that any future use of marijuana is grounds 
for revocation of a security clearance. He underwent a mandatory drug screening in June 
2016 for his current employer, and the test results were negative. He further states that 
his brother knows Applicant cannot use marijuana, and does not offer it to him. He does 
not associate with any other people who have “offered” him marijuana.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
3 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances . . . can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish the 
potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) any substance misuse. 
 
The following mitigating condition may also apply: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment were drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed a statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana is recent and casts doubt on his current reliability and 
trustworthiness. Applicant’s use, while infrequent, spanned a period of over 24 years. 
Applicant passed his June 2016 drug screening, asserts that he has not used marijuana 
since May 2016, and will not do so in the future. However, Applicant continues to 
associate with his brother, the only person with whom Applicant used marijuana. Because 
Applicant has provided contradictory and inconsistent statements regarding his marijuana 
use, his credibility is at issue, and his signed statement of intent to abstain from marijuana 
involvement in the future carries little weight. 
5 
 
 
 The Directive does not define “recent,” and there is no “bright-line” definition of 
what constitutes "recent" conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). 
The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a reasonable 
conclusion as to the recency of an applicant's conduct. ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 
(App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). Given Applicant’s relatively short period of abstinence, in light 
of his over 24 years of use, his inconsistent statements regarding his marijuana use, and 
his continued contact with his brother, Applicant has not mitigated the concern.  AG ¶¶ 
26(a) and 26(b) do not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis 
and have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his illegal drug use. Accordingly, I conclude he has failed to carry his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
