 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01586 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Victoria Cooper, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 21, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on September 19, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. There 
were no objections to any exhibits offered and all were admitted into evidence. Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) II is a demonstrative exhibit. DOHA received the hearing transcript on 
September 27, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel submitted an amendment to the SOR, which was previously 
provided to Applicant. It corrected typographical errors and account numbers. It also 
withdrew SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.o as duplicates. Applicant had no objection and the motion 
was granted.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations in ¶ 1 and denied the allegation in ¶ 
2. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, 
I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. She earned an associate’s degree in 2002 and continued 
to attend college classes, but did not earn a degree. She married in 1984 and divorced in 
1995. She remarried in 1999 and widowed in February 2017. She has two adult children 
ages 35, and 25.  
 
 Applicant was employed by the same company from 1987 to July 2009. She 
disclosed on her security clearance application (SCA) that she was unemployed from July 
2007 to September 2009 because her “children’s father passed away and they were 
having trouble with his death.”3 Her husband supported her. She went back to work in 
October 2011 and worked for this employer until sometime 2015. She was employed by 
a different employer from October 2015 to June 2016, when she was laid off. She began 
working for her present employer, a federal contractor, in July 2017.4  
 
 Applicant testified that she obtained student loans from 2003 to 2009 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.h and 1.s-1.x, totaling approximately $67,751). They were in deferment for a period. 
She has never made a payment on any of the loans. In the last 90 days, she has been 
working with a third party and is attempting to consolidate them. She stated that she does 
not dispute that she owes these loans and plans on paying them, but previous 
                                                          
2 HE I.  
 
3 GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 17, 20-24, 32-33, 51. 
 
 
3 
 
 
circumstances have not allowed her to do. She planned to repay these loans after she 
started her new job.5 
 
Applicant’s husband passed away in a fire at their home in February 2017, and her 
financial paperwork was kept in the kitchen and destroyed. She is the beneficiary of his 
two life insurance policies. She receives $4,197 a month for three years from one policy 
and a lump sum of $214,000 that is in a revocable trust from the other. She stated she 
had an appointment with a financial advisor 45 days ago. He told her to gather her 
financial information, and they would come up with a plan to help her with a budget and 
planning. Applicant stated that she has a second mortgage of $37,000 that she is 
responsible for resolving. She has a payment arrangement with the bank to resolve it.6  
 
Applicant acknowledged the medical debts alleged in the SOR (¶¶1.l-$561; 1.m-
$561; 1.n-$247; 1.p-$179; 1.q-$172; 1.r-$67; 1.y-$4,234; 1.z-$2,773; 1.aa-$1,065; 1.bb-
$69; 1.cc-$62). In 2015, during her background interview with a government investigator, 
she was confronted with many of them. She stated that she has contacted some medical 
creditors and has been paying them, but none of them are creditors for the debts on the 
SOR. The SOR alleged medical bills went to collection from approximately 2010 to 2015. 
None has been paid.7  
 
Applicant acknowledged the debt to a cellphone provider in SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,346). 
She disputed this debt because she stated that she had contacted the cellphone company 
and told them to block the cellphone to prevent her daughter from making purchases, and 
it failed to do so. Her daughter was on her account. Applicant indicated that the debt is 
more than five years old and is being resolved.8  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($1,003) is a car loan that Applicant thought was paid. During 
her 2015 background interview, she was confronted with the debt. She stated she paid 
the loan from 2006 to 2011 and believed it was satisfied. When she learned there was a 
balance, she was unemployed, and unable to pay it. She testified that she has asked the 
creditor for the amount to be paid and was advised it would be sent to her. She intends 
to pay it when she receives it. The debt remains unresolved.9  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by Applicant’s admissions and credit 
reports from October 2015 and July 2016.10 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 38-45. 
 
6 Tr. 42-50. 
 
7 Tr. 29-32, 35. 
 
8 GE 2; Tr. 36-38. 
 
9 GE 2; Tr. 26-29. 
 
10 GE 2, 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that she did not receive unemployment benefits when she was 
unemployed because her husband was earning an income. She stated that she did not 
pay her bills because her husband had legal problems, which included several driving 
under the influences charges from 2011 through 2015. He was required to pay for driving 
classes. They also owed income taxes for years 2009 and 2010 that affected her ability 
to pay other bills. She testified that she is current on all of her tax payments.11  
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in September 2015. 
Section 26 asked if she had defaulted on any type of loan in the past seven years; if she 
had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency in the last seven years; if she had 
any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed in the last seven years; or if she had been over 120 days delinquent on any debt 
not previously entered for which she was the sole debtor, as well as a cosigner or 
guarantor. Applicant answered “no” to all of these questions.12 
 
Applicant met with a government investigator in November 2015. She was given 
an opportunity to provide any additional information about her financial record. She 
confirmed that all of the information listed on her SCA was accurate. She was then 
confronted with her delinquent debts. She acknowledged the medical debts and indicated 
she was unaware when they were opened or collection details. She hoped to eventually 
put the debts on a payment plan and pay them off as soon as possible. She confirmed 
that she disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i as detailed above. She also acknowledged the 
car loan debt in SOR ¶ 1.j as detailed above.13  
 
During her interview, Applicant was confronted with her delinquent student loans. 
She stated they belonged to both her and her daughter. She was unaware of collection 
details. She was not currently making payments because she was pursuing a student 
loan forgiveness program. She stated that once she completed the program, she would 
then arrange a payment plan to pay the remaining amount owed. She stated she and her 
husband were unable to make the student loan payments and fell behind.14 
 
Applicant testified that she failed to disclose derogatory financial matters on her 
SCA because she was rushed when completing it, and she made a mistake and hit the 
wrong key when she checked “no” when she should have checked “yes.” I have 
considered all of the evidence, including that she had an opportunity to correct the 
information provided on her SCA when she was confronted by the investigator, but did 
not. She testified that she has never made any payments on the student loans. I conclude 
                                                          
11 Tr. 27-28, 33-35. 
 
12 GE 1. 
 
13 GE 2. 
 
14 GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 
that Applicant was aware of her delinquent student loans and deliberately failed to 
disclose her financial problems as required when she completed her SCA.15  
 
Applicant provided a character letter from her present supervisor. She described 
Applicant as conscientious about security protocol. She is a hard worker, trustworthy, and 
an important asset to the office.16   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
15 Tr. 54-56. 
 
16 AE A. 
 
6 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and student loans that she began 
accumulating several years ago that are unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has not paid any of her delinquent debts or student loans. She was put 
on notice in 2015, when she completed her SCA and after her interview with a government 
investigator, that her debts raised security concerns. She has not arranged to pay them. 
Her financial problems are ongoing. There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to a period of unemployment, her 
husband’s legal fees, and insufficient money to pay her debts. Applicant’s unemployment 
from 2009 to 2011 was voluntary and within her control. When she was laid off for a period 
of time, that was a condition beyond her control, as was her husband’s legal fees. For the 
full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She was aware of her student loans and has never made any payments 
on them. She told a government investigator that she was pursuing a loan forgiveness 
program, but did not provide evidence to show what action, if any, she has taken in that 
regard. She has not made payments or arranged payment plans to resolve other 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant testified that she recently contacted a financial advisor to help manage 
her inheritance and set up a financial plan. At the time of hearing, she did not provide 
evidence of a plan. There is some evidence she received financial counseling, but there 
is insufficient evidence to conclude that there are clear indications that her financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to resolve 
her delinquent debts and student loans. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant testified that she disputed certain debts alleged. She did not provide 
documented evidence to substantiate the basis of her dispute or evidence of her actions 
to resolve the issues. AG¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant testified that when she completed her SCA, she clicked the wrong button 
when she denied having debts over 120 days delinquent and other inquiries about her 
finances. Applicant was afforded an opportunity by a government investigator to review 
her SCA, and she affirmed that the answers were correct. When confronted about her 
delinquent student loans, she indicated that she got behind on paying them. She was 
aware of the medical debts and was going to work on a payment plan. At her hearing, 
Applicant testified that she has never made a student loan payment and was aware of 
unpaid medical bills. I find that Applicant’s omissions on her SCA were deliberate and her 
explanation was not credible. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
 
9 
 
 
(d) the individual acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made a good-faith effort to correct the omission 
before she was confronted with the facts. She was given that opportunity by the 
government investigator. I find AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Her deliberate failure to 
disclose financial problems and delinquencies is not minor and casts doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. There is 
insufficient evidence to raise AG ¶ 17(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. She has more than $68,000 of student loans and has 
never made payments on that debt. She also has other delinquent debts including 
medical accounts. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to show she is paying her 
delinquent debts or resolving her financial problems. She was aware of her delinquent 
debts and student loans when she completed her SCA and deliberately failed to disclose 
them. There is insufficient mitigating evidence. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.k:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.n:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.o:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.cc:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
