1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 17-00087 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is currently on probation stemming  from a conviction for driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI) in 2016. Consequently, it is too soon to conclude that she has 
mitigated the alcohol consumption security concern. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline G, and explaining why it was unable to find it clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility.The DOD CAF 
took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 5, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations, and 
requested a decision based on the written record instead of a hearing. On May 5, 2017, 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the 
FORM on May 31, 2017, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on October 
19, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1  
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 3 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on August 6, 2016. Such reports are inadmissible without 
authenticating witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  Consequently, I have not considered this 
document in my disposition of this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 30-year-old single woman. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009. 
Since January 2015, she has been working for a defense contractor as a control center 
specialist. (Item 1 at 9) 
 
 Applicant is highly respected on the job. A co-worker characterizes her as 
“profoundly responsible [and] reliable, and exhibits sound judgment in a consistent basis.” 
(Item 1 at 13) According to Applicant’s supervisor, she is a “strong team player” who is 
reliable and dependable. (Item 1 at 15) She was recently promoted in February 2017. (Item 
1 at 6) 
 
 In September 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. After pleading no 
contest, she was found guilty of a lesser charge and sentenced to 36 months of probation, 
fined $1,814, ordered to complete a three-month alcohol program, and ordered to 
completed 25 months of community service. (Item 1 at 2) Applicant completed the alcohol 
program and the community service, as required. 
 
 In July 2015, Applicant was again arrested and charged with DUI. In May 2016, she 
pleaded no contest. The following month, the court convicted her, and ordered her to 
spend four days in jail for violating probation related to the 2013 conviction. In addition, the 
court ordered her to attend an alcohol program for 18 months, and extended her probation 
for another four years. (Item 1 at 3) As of March 2017, she was in compliance with the 
rules and policies of the rehabilitation center. (Item 1 at 5) She no longer drinks and drives, 
and has had no arrests since the 2015 episode. 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Under this guideline, “excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”  (AG ¶ 21) Applicant’s history of alcohol-related 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
4 
 
arrests triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” 
Applicant’s second DUI arrest constituted a violation of probation, therefore, AG ¶ 22(g), 
“failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment or 
abstinence,” applies. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his pattern of maladaptive alcohol use, 
provides evidence of actions to overcome the problem, and has 
demonstrated a a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, and 
 
 (c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control. 
 
There is evidence that each of these mitigating conditions are applicable, as Applicant 
acknowledges her pattern of maladaptive alcohol use that led to the repeated DUI arrests. 
In addition, she has been actively participating in an alcohol-education class, as the court 
ordered after her 2015 arrest and conviction. However, she remains on probation. Under 
these circumstances, it is too soon to conclude that her alcohol consumption no longer 
casts doubt about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant has 
not mitigated the alcohol consumption security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Applicant’s strong character references certainly weigh in her favor. Her answer to 
the FORM was contrite and introspective. Nevertheless, the state court is still monitoring 
her behavior through a probation order. Under these circumstances, it is too soon to grant 
her the privilege of holding a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
5 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
