 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00394 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant Statements of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. On July 6, 2017, Applicant was issued 
amendments to the SOR.  The actions were taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and 
are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SORs on June 8, 2017 and July 24, 2017, respectively 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on July 25, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on August 21, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 22, 
2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F. There were no objections to any exhibits offered and 
all were admitted into evidence. Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is a demonstrative exhibit. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on October 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 
1.m. He denied the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.h, and 1.i. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He served in the military from 1977 to 1979 and was 
honorably discharged. He earned an associate’s degree in 1982. He married in 1980 and 
divorced in 1986. He remarried in 2001. He has no children.2  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment, 
underemployment, and costly moves to relocate for employment that occurred before he 
was hired by his present employer in December 2007. His finances deteriorated during 
this period. He used credit cards to pay for his moves. His wife worked, but was laid off 
in June 2008, and he was the sole wage earner. His income covered their living expenses. 
He continued to use credit cards and was using one card to pay another. In 2009, 
Applicant applied for a security clearance, which was denied because of his failure to 
timely respond to interrogatories about his financial situation.3  
 
 In 2011, Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with cancer and was unable to work for a 
period. She has been in remission for six years. He testified that she has an opportunity 
to go back to work. She had a shoulder operation in August 2015, and another operation 
in April 2017. He has a knee issue. He is responsible for the deductible with his medical 
insurance.4 
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by Applicant’s admissions, credit 
reports from March 2009, August 2011, June 2016, May 2017, and court records.5 
Applicant previously applied for a security clearance and received an SOR in April 2013. 
Some of the debts alleged on that SOR are alleged in the most recent SOR.  
                                                          
2 Tr. 19-22. 
 
3 Tr. 22-28; AE F. 
 
4 Tr. 56-61. 
 
5 GE 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10.  
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,064) is a state tax lien that was filed against Applicant in 2010. 
During his July 2016 background interview with a government investigator, he explained 
that when he moved to a new state he filed his state tax returns, but owed additional 
taxes. He was aware of the tax lien filed in April 2010 because he was receiving 
correspondence from the court. He did not pay it at the time because he was focusing on 
his wife’s medical bills. He provided documents from the state of an installment 
agreement executed in June 2016 for delinquent state taxes for years 2009, 2010, 2011, 
and 2012 ($2,089). In May 2017, the tax lien was satisfied.6 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c ($807, $1,375) are collection accounts. In September 2017, 
Applicant authorized the creditor to take automatic withdrawals from his account as part 
of a payment agreement with the creditor.7 SOR ¶ 1.k ($714) is a debt now held by the 
same collection agency. Applicant and the Government concurred that SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.k are duplicates. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l is also with the same collection agency. 
Applicant’s payment agreement does not include this debt. Documents provided by 
Applicant show that SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,171) was with the same collection agency, but was 
later sold to a different collection agency. He does not have a payment agreement with 
the new collection agency for that debt, but he intended to contact the new creditor.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e ($58,883) is a student loan in collection. Applicant obtained this loan in 
1980. He told the government investigator that after obtaining the loan, he forgot about 
the debt. About 10-15 years ago, he received a letter from the creditor about the loan 
being in default. He contacted the original creditor and was told the large balance was 
due to penalties and interest. He was going through a divorce at the time, and he could 
not afford to make payments. In 2015, he was again contacted by the creditor and was 
offered a payment plan. He did not agree to the plan. He wanted to negotiate a better 
plan, but has never followed through. He stated he made small payments over the past 
30 years and should have paid more attention to it. He did not provide supporting 
documents to verify payments. He stated he is trying to manage other payment plans and 
will address the larger debts later.9  
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g ($398, $444) are credit card debts. Applicant could not recall 
how old they are, but estimated about five to six years old. He acknowledged he is 
obligated to pay them, but does not have a plan at this time.10  
                                                          
6 Tr. 28-31; GE 1, 4, 5, 6, 7; AE C. Applicant’s documents reflect that he failed to timely pay his state taxes 
for additional years that were not alleged in the SOR. I will not consider this information or any derogatory 
information that was not alleged in the SOR, except when making a credibility determination, in the 
application of mitigation, and when making a whole-person analysis.  
 
7 AE A, B. Applicant’s payment plan with the collection agency includes other debts that are not alleged in 
the SOR. As previously stated this information will only be considered as noted above and not for 
disqualifying purposes.  
 
8 Tr. 31-39; GE 1, 2, 4, 5, 6. 
 
9 Tr. 39-43; GE 1, 2, 5, 6. 
 
10 Tr. 43-45; GE 1, 2, 4, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h ($1,061) is a cable bill. Applicant testified that this debt was under his 
wife’s name, and he did not feel responsible for paying it. The evidence indicates that the 
account is an individual account in Applicant’s name. During Applicant’s background 
interview, he acknowledged that when he and his wife moved they had the debt, but he 
was unable to pay it because he was focusing on his wife’s medical expenses. He has 
not contacted the creditor, but he intends to resolve the debt.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i is a 2015 debt for ambulance service for Applicant’s wife. During his 
background interview, he acknowledged the debt. He believed his medical insurer was 
required to pay this account. At that time, he intended to contact the insurance company 
and resolve the debt. At his hearing, he testified that he has not done anything to resolve 
the debt, and it remains unpaid.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j ($3,690) is a judgment. Applicant testified that when he moved in 2006 
his car was repossessed. He has not addressed this judgment and had no explanation 
for why he failed to pay it.13 It remain unpaid. 
 
 Applicant stated that his delinquent debts were not prioritized because he was 
trying to pay day to day expenses. He has three credit cards that are being paid timely. 
Two have balances less than a $200 and the third has a balance of $1,100. He made a 
budget a few days before his hearing. He provided a copy of medical claims for him and 
his wife from 2016 and 2017. He highlighted some claims that he thinks he may be 
responsible for and not covered by insurance. He has not participated in financial 
counseling, but intends to in the future.14 
 
 Applicant provided a letter from his employer verifying that he has worked for 10 
years with the company and has excelled. He has received compliments for his 
professionalism and achievements in successfully completing the mission.15 Applicant 
testified that he can obtain a loan from his employer to pay some of his smaller delinquent 
debts, but he wanted to do it on his own. He is reconsidering that option.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
                                                          
 
11 Tr. 46-50; GE 2, 5.  
 
12 Tr. 50-52; GE 2, 5. 
 
13 Tr. 52-53; GE 8. 
 
14 Tr. 54-72; AE D, E. 
 
15 AE F. 
 
16 Tr. 45. 
 
5 
 
 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
6 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that have been unpaid or unresolved for 
many years. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s debts have been delinquent for many years. He has been aware that 
they are a security concern for many years because he previously applied for a security 
clearance and his delinquent debts were raised. Applicant recently made a payment plan 
for a couple of his debts, but many he has not addressed. His financial problems are 
recent and ongoing. The evidence is insufficient to conclude that his behavior is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to unemployment, underemployment, 
moving expenses, and medical bills. These issues were beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant testified that his student loan is from 1980. He was contacted 
twice by the creditor, but has failed to take any action to resolve this debt, which has 
escalated over the years due to penalties and interest. He has a judgment for a 
repossessed vehicle from 2006 that remains unpaid. He has delinquent credit cards, but 
he has not contacted the creditors. Some of his debts predate his wife’s illness. He has 
been employed steadily since December 2007. The evidence is lacking to find that he 
acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has a payment plan for two of the alleged debts. Included in that plan 
are other delinquent debts that were not alleged. He had a tax lien from 2010. The 
documents he provided showed he owed taxes for other years. He recently resolved his 
tax debts and lien. There is no evidence that he received financial counseling and that 
there are clear indications that his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does 
not apply.  
 
 Applicant recently paid his 2010 tax lien. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to this debt as he has 
completed the installment plan. Applicant recently arranged a payment plan for accounts 
that are in collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). Because he only recently started this plan 
after these debts have been delinquent for years, it is too early to conclude that he is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to pay overdue creditors or resolve his debts. There is no 
evidence that he is paying any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply.  
 
 Applicant denied some of the SOR debts, but failed to show why he is not 
responsible for them or that he has a legitimate dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 58 years old and has a long history of failing to responsibly pay his 
debts. At different times, he might have had legitimate reasons for getting behind in paying 
his bills, but he failed to take any meaningful action when he was able. He has been 
employed since 2007. His wife’s cancer has been in remission since 2011. I have 
considered that he was prioritizing paying his wife’s medical bills, but some debts have 
remained unpaid for many years without being addressed. He has a student loan that he 
owes from 1980, a judgment that he has not paid because he did not see a reason to pay 
it, and other debts that have languished. Applicant has been aware over the years that 
his finances are a security concern, but has made minimal progress in paying his 
delinquent debts. He did not provide sufficient evidence in mitigation. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.l:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
