 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00942 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 22, 
2014. On April 21, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 7, 2017, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations except for the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f, which he denied. He 
stated he was unaware of these delinquent debts because either it was a duplicate (1.c) 
or the debts were incurred by his estranged wife while he was stationed in Korea. 
Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on July 6, 2017. The case was assigned to me on July 17, 2017. 
On August 22, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for September 27, 2017. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
October 6, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He graduated from high school in 1994, and took some 
college courses. Applicant is pending employment by a federal contractor working for 
the Army Corps of Engineers, depending on his ability to obtain a security clearance. He 
has been unemployed for most of 2017 until he recently obtained a job, six weeks 
before the hearing. Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army from 1994 to 2015. He 
retired in November 2015 as a Staff Sergeant. He was deployed to Afghanistan three 
times, Bosnia once, and he served in Korea from March 2010 to 2013. He received 
numerous awards and decorations including the Meritorious Service Medal, Joint 
Forces Commendation Medal, seven Army Commendation Medals and 3 Army 
Achievement Medals. He was married in 2008, but reports no children. He lived with his 
wife for two years when he returned from Korea, until she disappeared in 2016. So, he 
has been separated from his estranged wife since July 2016, and they are pending 
divorce if he could find her to serve her with process.  
  
The SOR alleged nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $60,000 plus an 
allegation of misuse of a government issued travel card while Applicant was on active 
duty. The SOR alleged in ¶ 1.a that Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a charged-off 
account in the approximate amount of $23,259. Applicant admitted this allegation in his 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s September 22, 2014 
security clearance application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on November 4, 
2017. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Answer to the SOR and stated “I am making regular payments on this account.” At the 
hearing, Applicant testified credibly that this was for an automobile, which he never 
possessed, and was being repossessed by a collection agent. His estranged wife 
absconded with this automobile and her whereabouts are unknown. Applicant did not 
file a police report, because the creditor indicated it was repossessing the vehicle. He 
did notify the department of motor vehicles and cancelled insurance on the vehicle. It 
was titled solely in Applicant’s name. Applicant has cooperated with the creditor in 
locating the vehicle. It is not clear how much of this auto-loan debt will remain once the 
creditor recovers the collateral.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are two charged-off accounts in the exact same amount 
($6,544) by a predatory lender selling furniture and electronics that Applicant’s 
estranged wife purchased. She took the furniture with her when she disappeared. I find 
that SOR ¶ 1.c is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant last made a payment on this 
account in November 2015. The cost of the items has been paid-off, but the remaining 
balance is for exorbitant interest and fees.3  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is for a charged-off debt in the amount of $1,794 that Applicant paid-
off when he retired in 2015. I agreed to keep the record open until October 9, 2017.4 
Applicant submitted post-hearing “rebuttal documents” including a September 6, 2017 
receipt documenting Applicant’s dispute and asking that this delinquency be removed 
from his credit bureau reports. Similarly, Applicant produced a dispute letter dated July 
12, 2017, sent to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.e concerning the application fee for an 
apartment that his estranged wife rented while Applicant was in Korea.  
 
 The SOR alleges in SOR ¶ 1.f that Applicant is indebted to a creditor on a 
delinquent account placed for collection in the amount of $458. Applicant denied this 
allegation in his Answer to the SOR since it was, once again, a debt that his wife 
incurred without his knowledge, while Applicant was stationed in Korea from 2010 to 
2013. He gave her a general power of attorney (GPOA) to conduct business while he 
was out of the country. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has recently hired a 
national credit-repair service to dispute this debt and others, and remove them from his 
credit reports.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g is a delinquent debt for a medical account in the approximate amount 
of $104. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that this was for a visit that he 
made to urgent care in 2016, but his primary provider would not provide Tricare with an 
authorization for this visit. Applicant disputed this and he produced post-hearing 
documents demonstrating that Tricare has now resolved it and his co-pay should have 
been only $12. That amount has been paid. SOR ¶ 1.h was an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $321 by a telecommunications company. Applicant testified 
                                                          
3 Answer to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 26. 
 
 
4 
 
 
credibly that he long ago terminated this account and turned-in the equipment.5 It has 
been resolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a charged-off account in the amount of $18,921 owed to a 
bank-creditor. Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer to the SOR, and stated that he 
has not yet set up a payment plan with this creditor. He testified credibly at the hearing 
that he intends to set up a payment plan with this creditor with the help of the national 
credit-repair service that he recently hired.6 Applicant’s credit scores of 575 (Equifax) 
and 584 (TransUnion) are reflected in AE’s A and B. There, it is noted that Applicant’s 
credit “needs work.”  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j alleges that Applicant made an unauthorized purchase using a  
government travel card in November 2014, while he was on active duty. He was 
administered a company grade Article 15 [UCMJ non-judicial punishment] and given 
extra duties for 15 days. Applicant admitted this allegation in his Answer to the SOR. 
The JPAS entries (GE 6) reflect that the Article 15 was on May 29, 2015. Applicant 
testified that he withdrew $150 dollars for food and gas, using the travel card, and he 
paid it back the next day. He made a mistake and served his punishment. This is 
resolved.   
 
 Applicant needs a security clearance for his anticipated job with a federal 
contractor. Applicant’s monthly take-home pay is presently $2,500 a month from 
retirement pay, plus another $2,000 to $2,400 a month, from his new job. He expects to 
have any remaining delinquent debts settled soon, now that he is working. He is making 
payments on a plan proposed by his credit-repair company. He had financial counseling 
while he was on active duty in the Army.   
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 47. 
 
6 Tr. at 48-49. 
 
 
5 
 
 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds…  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
6 
 
 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.7 Applicant has met that burden. Most of the delinquent 
debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s estranged wife left him in 2016, with an automobile, furniture and no 
way for Applicant to contact her. Since then, he has been underemployed awaiting his 
security clearance. Arguably, these conditions were beyond his control. He has now 
produced relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has met his burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He has either paid off, 
disputed, or made consistent payments pursuant to a plan, on most of his delinquent 
debts. He produced letters and bank statements to confirm that eight out of the nine 
delinquencies alleged in his SOR have been resolved. The other one (SOR ¶ 1.i), 
$18,921 owed to a bank, is expected to be resolved by consistent monthly payments 
pursuant to a plan formulated by Applicant’s credit-repair service. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant’s estranged wife ran up several 
delinquent debts, using a GPOA that he provided to her while he was in Korea. She 
then absconded with his automobile and furniture. Applicant served honorably for more 
than 20 years in the Army, including four deployments to war zones. He has struggled 
to overcome his wife’s betrayal and stay employed consistently. Applicant testified 
credibly and persuasively that his finances are now under control. Most importantly, 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative 
measures to resolve them. He has met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He is 
gainfully employed and managing his financial affairs. The record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:             For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
