 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00264 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 10, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On May 1, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Government Exhibit 4.)  On March 23, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations; and Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 18, 2017. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
May 11, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 13 Items, was 
received by Applicant on May 18, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 13 are admitted 
into evidence, and going forward are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 13.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He has never been married and has one child.  He has 
a high school diploma.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Security Officer.   
He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 13 allegations involving delinquent debts totaling approximately $48,354, 
which include taxes, child support, a 2006 judgment, and other consumer debt.   
Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  (Government Exhibit 4.)   
 
Applicant has no military service.  He has been working for a number of defense 
contractors from about January 2000 to the present, and has previously held a security 
clearance.  Between January 2010 and April 2010 he was unemployed.  He claims that 
he is currently making payments to resolve each of the debts set forth in the SOR. 
 
 Credit Reports of the Applicant dated May 4, 2010; two dated February 3, 2012; 
May 20, 2015; May 9, 2017; and two dated May 10, 2017, indicate his indebtedness to 
each of the creditors listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10.)  
There is no track record of debt resolution efforts or any regular payments made despite 
the age of the obligations.  (Government Exhibit 4, pg. 36.) 
 
3 
 
 1.a.  Applicant’s wages were garnished by a creditor in about March 2016, in the 
approximate amount of $1,811.  There is no evidence to show that the garnishment 
order has been completed.  Applicant submitted documents to show that payments 
were made through garnishment, but it is not clear whether the debt was paid in full.  As 
of December 2016, there remained a balance due of $623.63.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  
 
 1.b.  In 2015, a lien was placed against his wages by a state for delinquent taxes 
in the approximate amount of $9,325.  There is no evidence to show that the 2015 tax 
lien has been satisfied or is being paid through a payment plan.  Applicant provided 
documentation to show that he paid a 2012 tax lien in the amount of $3,685.60 
(Government Exhibit 2.)     
 
 1.c.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $122.  There is no evidence to show that the 
debt has been satisfied. 
 
 1.d.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $267.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied.    
 
 1.e.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $279.  There is no evidence to show that the 
debt has been satisfied. 
 
 1.f.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $491.  There is no evidence to show that the 
debt has been satisfied. 
 
 1.g.  Applicant is indebted to the child support enforcement administration in the 
approximate amount of $7,166.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been  
satisfied.  Applicant submitted documentation of child support payments up to February 
2016.  His child support payments since then have not been addressed.  His most 
current credit report reflects a remaining balance of $6,427, with $5,788 past due.  
(Government Exhibit 9.) 
 
 1.h.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $13,265.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied.    
 
 1.i.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $270.  There is no evidence to show that the 
debt has been satisfied. 
 
 1.j.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for  
collection in the approximate amount of $437.  There is no evidence to show that the 
debt has been satisfied. 
 
 
4 
 
 1.k.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
in the approximate amount of $4,471.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has 
been satisfied. 
 
 1.l. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $5,149.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied. 
 
 1.m.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $5,301.  There is no evidence to show that the debt has been 
satisfied.  
 
 Applicant has indicated an intent to resolve his delinquent debts but has failed to 
establish a track record showing that he has done so.  He has provided no 
documentation corroborating any alleged settlement offers, settlement agreements, 
payments plans or payments for any of the remaining accounts alleged in the SOR.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), Standard Form 86 dated May 1, 2015.  Section 26 asked about his Financial 
Record, specifically, whether in the past 7 years, he had been delinquent on alimony or 
child support payments.  Applicant responded, “NO.”  (Government Exhibit 4.)  This was 
a false answer.  
 
On the same questionnaire, Section 26 asked about Applicant’s Financial 
Record, specifically, whether in the past 7 years, he had defaulted on any type of loan; 
had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; or had his wages, 
benefits, or assets garnished; Applicant responded, “NO,” to all of these questions.  
These were false answers.  Applicant failed to list the delinquent debts set forth in 
subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.m, above.  (Government Exhibit 4.)   
   
 Applicant admits the allegations set forth under this guideline and provides no 
explanation for his falsifications.  It can therefore be assumed that he deliberately 
attempted to conceal his financial history from the government on his security clearance 
application.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks national security eligibility enters into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is indebted to thirteen separate creditors in an amount totaling 
approximately $48,000.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  Applicant provides insufficient information concerning his financial affairs that 
demonstrate appropriate mitigation.  There is no evidence of any established payments 
agreements or his ability to follow an agreement to show a systematic method of 
payment.  There is nothing done voluntarily to show that he has done anything to 
resolve his debts.  He has made some payments toward one debt through garnishment, 
he had made some payments toward a state tax lien, but not the lien listed in the SOR, 
and he has made some child support payments.  The remaining debt is still outstanding.  
Given these circumstances, there is no evidence that he has acted reasonably and 
responsibly. His actions demonstrate unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor 
judgment. 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant provided no explanation as to why he did not reveal his delinquent 
indebtedness on his security clearance application.  He deliberately falsified his security 
clearance application in response to the questions regarding his finances.  He did not 
answer the question truthfully about his finances, which shows poor judgment, 
unreliability and untrustworthiness.  There are no applicable conditions that could be 
mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality 
of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
