 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01105 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on 
the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on July 4, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on August 3, 2017 and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a one-page 
response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 4, is 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 23, 
2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He graduated from high school in 1978. Applicant has 
been employed as a quality inspector by a federal contractor since February 2013. 
Applicant had been employed by the same federal contractor from 1988 to 2010. He 
was laid off in February 2010 and unemployed for one year before being re-hired. He 
reports no military service and no previous security clearance. Applicant was married 
the first time from 1988 to 1991, and from 2004 to 2012. He has one adult son. 
Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application on February 24, 2016 (SCA).2  
 
In his June 5, 2017 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both allegations in 
the SOR. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant was a member and former president of a 
chapter of the Pagan Outlaw Motorcycle Club (“POMC”), and he was associated with 
other members of the club who were involved in criminal activity. He was president of 
the club for one year, and a member of the club from about the mid- 1990s to at least 
2004. In his Answer, Applicant stated “I admit to being a member but never got in any 
trouble during that time. I do not and have not done or sold any drugs or illegal 
activities.”  
 
An FBI report dated June 18, 2016, referenced Applicant in an Organized Crime 
Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF) investigation initiated in July 1997. The report 
states that it was determined that Applicant was the president of POMC, Pittsburg 
Chapter. Further, “the investigation showed [Applicant] may have participated in the 
selling of stolen motorcycle parts and may have also influenced other members to 
participate in illegal activities such as theft and assault of other members of the 
organization.”3 The FBI found that the POMC is one of the predominant motorcycle 
clubs in the United States and the Pagans have been involved in weapons violations, 
assaults, extortions, murders, and other offenses, including the manufacture and 
distribution of illegal drugs.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant falsified material facts during a personal subject 
interview on January 26, 2017, when he denied membership with the POMC until 
further questioning when the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
confronted him with this information. In his clearance interview, Applicant initially denied 
involvement with POMC even after the OPM investigator confronted him saying “some 
people have said that I was part of the club.”4 Applicant was asked if he was ever 
president of the club, and he denied it initially. After the OPM investigator persevered, 
Applicant eventually admitted his involvement including his stint as president of a 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s February 24, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 2) and the summary of his personal subject interview 
conducted on January 22, 2017. (Item 3) 
 
2 Item 2.  
 
3 Item 4.  
 
4 Item 3, p. 3. 
 
3 
 
 
chapter of the POMC. He denied involvement in any illegal activity. He stated that he 
did not initially respond truthfully to the questions because he was afraid it would be 
held against him and affect his eligibility for the clearance. I conclude that he had the 
specific intent to deceive.  
  
In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he made a “stupid mistake as 
a young man that should not have an impact on my life now. Yes, I was so embarrassed 
and I should not have lied. I am a different man now. I love my job and I am totally loyal 
. . . .” Further, Applicant stated that he has never been arrested and he has no criminal 
record. His request for a second chance would be more availing if he had disclosed his 
earlier mistakes in belonging to POMC.  
 
                                            Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
5 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
 Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes . . . .  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
 
5 
 
 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
 (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s  
   personal, professional, or community standing;  
 
 (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in  
  that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, while 
legal there, is illegal in the United States; and  
 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.   
The operative word in the POMC organization’s title is outlaw. It is renowned for 
not following rules and regulations. Affiliation with such an organization raises questions 
about an Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. However, this concern may have been mitigated had Applicant 
simply disclosed it in his SCA or to the OPM investigator. Since Applicant admitted the 
allegations, his intent to provide false information as alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b, is clear. 
Applicant was reluctant to provide truthful answers to the OPM investigator because he 
feared it might affect his eligibility for a security clearance. The security clearance 
process requires Applicants to be truthful, candid, and cooperative. It should not be like 
pulling teeth for the OPM investigator to extract accurate information. I conclude that he 
had the specific intent to deceive when he repeatedly tried to conceal his involvement 
with POMC from the OPM investigator. There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
 
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline.   
 
Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.b:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
