 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 17-00541  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Bryan Olmos, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 17, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 6, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On March 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2017. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  (Item 2.)  On 
May 16, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 8 Items, were 
received by Applicant on June 12, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 8 are admitted 
into evidence, and going forward are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 8.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. Applicant is divorced.  He has a Bachelor’s degree in 
Business Management. He is employed with a defense contractor as a 
Translator/Spanish Linguist. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection 
with his employment.   
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.   
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts Applicant accumulated consisting of a 
delinquent mortgage account and various consumer accounts totaling in excess of 
$100,000.  Applicant denies each of the allegations and claims that he was the victim of 
identity theft in 2011, conducted by a group of sophisticated individuals who used his 
identity in a highly elaborate and complex scheme to obtain multiple luxury vehicles, 
and goods and services that caused this financial problem.  Applicant states that when 
he learned of the theft, he filed a police report, contacted the credit bureaus, blocked his 
credit files, placed a fraud alert on his files, and filed a consumer statement explaining 
his situation.  Applicant contents that the three major credit reporting agencies are 
reporting inaccurate and erroneous information.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)   
 
 In regard to the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR, discussed below, 
Applicant stated in June 2016, during his security clearance background investigation, 
 
 
3 
 
 
that due to the recession in 2008, he fell behind on these bills, and was unable to afford 
to pay them.  During the interview, he recognized each debt, and indicated that he 
planned to pay them off when he is financially able to do so.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  
The following delinquent debts set forth in the  SOR remain outstanding:  
 
 1.a.  The SOR alleges that Applicant remains indebted for an account that was 
placed for collection in the approximate amount of $22,698.  This account was opened 
in 2006.  Applicant stated that he planned to pay off the debt.  He states that he did not 
list this debt on his security clearance application due to an oversight.  He stated that 
the debt was due to the recession of 2008, as he was unable to make the payments.  
(Government Exhibit 5.)       
 
  1.b.  A delinquent credit card debt for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $6,972, remains unpaid.  Applicant was not sure when he 
opened the account, but he agreed with the information.  He further stated that he was 
not able to make payments toward the debt as a result of the recession in 2008.  
Applicant did not list the debt on his security clearance application due to an oversight.  
(Government Exhibit 5.)   
 
 1.c.  A delinquent credit card debt for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $4,909, remains unpaid.  The Applicant stated that he was 
not sure when he opened the account, but that he agreed with the information.  He was 
unable to afford to make payments toward the debt as a result of the recession in 2008.  
He did not list the debt on his security clearance application due to an oversight.  
(Government Exhibit 5.)   
 
 1.d.  A delinquent credit card debt for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $4,329 remains unpaid.  Applicant stated that the account was 
opened in 2006.  He was unable to afford to make the payments, but he plans to pay it 
off when he is able to.  He did not list the debt on his security clearance application due 
to an oversight.  (Government Exhibit 5.)   
 
 1.e.  A delinquent debt for an account that was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $3,767 remains unpaid.  Applicant stated that the account was opened in 
2005.  The debt was incurred because he could not afford to make the payments.  He 
plans to pay off the balance once he is able to.  He did not list the debt on his security 
clearance application due to an oversight.  (Government Exhibit 5.) 
 
 1.f.  A delinquent debt owed to a department store for an account that was 
placed for collection in the approximate amount of $1,965 remains unpaid.  Applicant 
states that this account was opened in 2008.  Applicant stated that he could incurred the 
debt because he could not afford to make the payments.  He plans to pay off the 
balance when he is able to.  (Government Exhibit 5.)   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.g.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $25,647, with a total balance of $69,266 remains unpaid.  
Applicant claims that this debt was incurred due to the recession of 2008 and he was 
unable to afford to make the payments.  He plans to pay off the account when he is able 
to do so.  (Government Exhibit 5.) 
 
 1.h. A delinquent credit card debt for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $967 remains unpaid. Applicant states that he opened the 
account in 2006.  He incurred the debt because he could not afford to make the 
payments.  He plans to pay off the balance when he is able to.  (Government Exhibit 5.)   
 
 1.i.  A delinquent credit card debt for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $7,490 remain unpaid.   Applicant states that the account 
was opened in 2006.  The debt was incurred because he was unable to afford to make 
the payments.  Applicant plans to pay off the balance when he is able to do so.  
(Government Exhibit 5.) 
 
 Applicant blames the identity theft in 2011 for his current financial situation.  
However, his financial problems started long before 2011.  Several of the delinquent  
accounts became delinquent in 2006.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  Over time, two of the 
accounts have been charged off.  (Government Exhibit 8.)  Several accounts remain in 
collection.  (Government Exhibit 8.)  Most importantly, each of the debts listed in the 
SOR were recognized, acknowledged, and addressed specifically by the Applicant in 
2016, during his security clearance background interview with the investigator.  
(Government Exhibit 5.)  At that time Applicant admitted each debt, knew when he 
opened the account, and told the government that he planned to pay it.  Applicant 
claimed at that time that his financial stress has been caused by delays in processing 
his security clearance and his inability to start new employment.  During this period, 
Applicant claims that he exhausted his savings.    
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
 
 
5 
 
 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
 
 
6 
 
 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially  
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
  
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial distress.  He opened a number of accounts in 
2006 and by 2008 could not afford to make the payments.  He now claims that he was a 
victim of identity theft in 2011 that caused his financial problems.  Applicant’s identity 
theft in 2011 had no impact on the delinquent debts he incurred “due to the recession in 
2008,” or his inability to afford to make the payments on those debts.  Under the 
particular circumstances here, Applicant has not acted reasonably or shown good 
judgment in resolving his debts.  He has provided no evidence to show that he has paid 
any of them.  It appears that he is simply waiting for them to fall off of his credit report 
given the age of the obligation.  These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes one condition in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
Under the particular circumstances here, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  The identity 
theft that occurred in 2011 did not involve any of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
Furthermore, Applicant has not initiated a good faith effort to repay his creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts.  He has not acted reasonably under the circumstances.  In 
fact his recent credit reports continue to reflect multiple accounts in collection and 
charge off.  He has not submitted any compelling evidence that he has established a 
meaningful track record of repayment or that he had a basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
these delinquent debts.  The record establishes no mitigation of financial security 
concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(g). 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has worked for as a 
Government contractor for the past seventeen years, and he has held a security 
clearance in the past.  Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He has not met 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
