 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01385 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline H (drug involvement 
and substance misuse). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H. On June 16, 
2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On July 6, 2017, the Government submitted its written case. On July 13, 2017, 
Applicant received a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM). She was 
afforded 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional information.  
 
On October 16, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The Government exhibits, 
Items 1 through 4, included in the FORM, are admitted in evidence. On November 12, 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2017, I reopened the record until November 17, 2017, to provide Applicant with an 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted an e-mail 
response, marked as Item 5, which is admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR, with explanations. Her 
admission and explanation are accepted as a finding of fact. Additional findings of fact 
follow.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 23-year-old biomedical engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since June 2016. She seeks a security clearance in conjunction with her current 
employment. Applicant graduated from high school in July 2012. She attended college 
from August 2012 to May 2016, and was awarded a bachelor’s degree in May 2016. 
Applicant has never married and has no dependents. 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
The underlying basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement is derived from her 
self-disclosure and is not disputed. Her past drug use consists of: (1) In March 2015, 
Applicant used marijuana one time at a college party; (2) In November 2016, Applicant 
used marijuana one time at a cast party; and (3) In December 2016, Applicant used 
marijuana one time again at a cast party.  (SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant reported in detail the 
circumstances of her three-time past marijuana use during her December 21, 2016 
Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI) and in her 
SOR answer. (Items 2, 4) On November 16, 2017, Applicant reaffirmed her SOR 
answer stating that it is “still current and accurate.” (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant has never been arrested because of past involvement with drugs. (Item 
1) She submitted a signed statement of intent to refrain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for 
revocation of national security eligibility. (Item 2) Applicant recognizes the adverse 
effects drug use would have on her future employability and is committed to avoiding 
drug-using associates and contacts. (Items 2, 5) She added in her OPM PSI that she 
does not intend to use marijuana in the future because she is trying to get into the 
National Guard. (Item 4)  
 
Policies 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
was issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative 
guidelines implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made 
on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated this case under Executive 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 2017.1 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
  
                                                          
1 http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4_20170608.pdf 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline H through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of two drug involvement and 
substance misuse disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above 
definition);”2 and AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement 
and substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation form drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a signed statement of intent to 
abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.”  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”3 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was December 2016, about 11 
months before this decision was issued. Her illegal drug use ended when she realized 
the adverse effects it could have on her future. The absence of evidence of more recent 
or extensive drug use, and her promise not to use illegal drugs in the future eliminates 
doubts about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to 
abstaining from illegal drug use.4   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists three ways Applicant can demonstrate her intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. With reflection on the adverse effects continued drug use 
could have on her future, she has broken or reduced the prevalence of her patterns of 
drug abuse, and she has made life changes with respect to illegal drug use. She has 
abstained from drug abuse for about 11 months and has had no problem in doing so. 
AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
Applicant is a recent college graduate and recently began her professional career 
as a defense contractor. Her limited involvement with marijuana was infrequent and 
occurred at a time in her life when she may not have been fully cognizant of the adverse 
consequences of her actions. From all indications, Applicant is committed to succeeding 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
4In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
in her career and desire to join the National Guard. In short, she recognizes that drug 
misuse is incompatible with her future career. She expressed a steadfast commitment 
to continue lifestyle changes consistent with total abstinence of marijuana or any other 
drugs. I find for Applicant under this concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline H is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, additional comments 
are warranted. 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. She self-reported her limited drug misuse, which 
demonstrated a willingness to accept responsibility for her past actions. Her self-
introspection should ensure her continued success. Applicant demonstrated the correct 
attitude and commitment to remaining drug free. Considering the evidence presented, I 
believe Applicant has learned from her mistakes, and this behavior is unlikely to recur. I 
find Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 
  
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors”5 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines.  
 
 
  
                                                          
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
