 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00626 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
11/07/2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her failure to resolve her tax issues and her 
unresolved delinquent debts. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 17, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guidelines1 Applicant timely 
answered the SOR and requested an administrative determination. 
 
On May 26, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s written 
case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant eight exhibits for admission into the record. The exhibits 
accompanying the FORM are admitted into the record. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. On October 20, 2017, I was assigned the case for decision.  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. She has been divorced twice and has two adult sons. 
She has been self-employed as a personnel security specialist from December 15 to the 
present. She was employed with a temporary agency from February 2014 to December 
15, 2015. She has been unemployed for periods of time in 2013 and 2014. She worked 
short-term jobs from 2010 to 2013.  She graduated from high school in 1975. Applicant 
completed her security clearance application in December 2015, disclosing delinquent 
debts from 2009, and failure to file her federal income tax returns from 2010 to 2014. 
(Item 4) She also reported that she had her wages garnished in mid 2015. 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in her 2016 investigative interview. She 
stated that she did not have the income due to unemployment or low-paying jobs. (Item 
8) In her answer, she admitted all SOR allegations, but provided no details. She also 
stated that she had not filed her federal income tax returns. (SOR 1.i and 1.j) After 
admitting ten allegations in the SOR, she did not provide any documentation as to 
payment plans or resolution of any of the delinquent debts. (Item 1) The total amount of 
the debts listed in the SOR is $13,263 (SOR 1.a-h). (Item 2) Applicant did not provide a 
plan for future resolution of the debts, although she intends to pay her debts. (Item 2) In 
her answer to the SOR, she stated that all federal income tax returns were filed, but 
again provided no documentation for the assertion. (Item 6) It is not clear from the 
record as to the current financial status because she did not submit any information.  
 
 Applicant did not provide any documentation that she has satisfied the 
allegations. Applicant did not send any information with her Answer to the SOR. She 
chose to have a decision rendered on the written record, but did not provide any 
information to allow mitigation. She has not met her burden of proof in this case.  
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s finances remain a source of concern. Failure to meet one’s financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.2 Applicant’s 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ (18). 
 
 
4 
 
admissions and the credit reports establish the Government’s prima facie case that 
Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial obligations and that she did not file 
her federal income tax returns from 2011 to 2015. Her reason for the delinquent debts is 
unemployment, but that does not relieve her of her obligation to file her tax returns.  She 
presented no documentation with her answer to the SOR, and even after receiving a 
notice concerning documentation from Department Counsel regarding specific 
information, she did not provide relevant information. She stated that she will pay her 
debts and that her tax returns have been filed, but there is no information in the record. 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and were partially caused by events beyond 
her control (unemployment). Although Applicant has expressed a desire to repay her 
creditors, the alleged accounts remain unresolved and Applicant did not present a plan 
for resolving them. 3 
  
After a review of the record and a consideration of the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2(d), I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems render her unsuitable for 
access to classified information at this time. It is Applicant’s burden to provide 
information to show what action she has taken towards paying, settling, or otherwise 
resolving any of her debts, in order to show that the debts are no longer a security 
concern. This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant 
cannot or will not attain the type of financial stability necessary to reapply for national 
security eligibility in the future. Rather, it is recognition of the fact that financial issues 
have historically been a motivating factor behind acts of espionage. The award of a 
security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the 
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. While a favorable 
decision is not warranted at this time, she may present persuasive evidence of financial 
rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 AG 19 
 
5 
 
 
  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
