 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01758 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 22, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 21, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 21, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on September 19, 2017. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. There 
were no objections to any exhibits offered and they were admitted into evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on September 27, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On August 29, 2017, the Government amended SOR ¶ 1.a to add his mother and 
half-siblings as residents and citizens of Somalia. Applicant admitted the amended 
allegation and had no objection.2  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted HE II, a written request that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Somalia. Applicant did not object, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported by source 
documents from official U.S. Government publications.3 The facts are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR and amended SOR. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He was born in Somalia. He immigrated to the United 
States in 1983 and became a naturalized citizen in 1989. He married in 1983 and divorced 
in 1988. He had no children from the marriage. He remarried in 1990 and divorced in 
2004. He has three children from that marriage, ages 24, 19, and 16 years old.  All were 
born in the United States. He remarried in 2008 and divorced in 2015. He has no children 
from this marriage.4  
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in Somalia and resided there while Applicant was 
growing up. After they divorced, he lived with his father and his sisters lived with their 
mother. His father was abusive, and Applicant ran away. He struggled living on his own, 
but put himself through school by being a tailor. He graduated and successfully passed 
tests to be an elementary and middle school teacher.5  
Applicant’s father remarried after his divorce. Applicant’s father had six children 
with his wife, a Somalian citizen and resident. His father worked in a blue-collar position 
for the Somali government. His father became sick and asked Applicant to help support 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the amended SOR.  
 
3 HE III are the source documents. 
 
4 Tr. 30-33; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 22, 40-42. 
 
3 
 
 
his half-siblings and to be responsible for them. Applicant could not turn them away with 
no assistance. There were no other family members to help them. Applicant has been 
sending them money since his father’s death in 2008. The children are ages 23, 21, 20, 
17, and twins age 15 years old.6  
 
 Applicant testified that he contacts the children by telephone and tells them to do 
the right thing. He gives them advice and encourages them to learn English. He provided 
them financial support of about $360 monthly. On his Counterintelligence-Focused 
Security Screening Questionnaire, he disclosed that he estimated he provided his half-
siblings a total of about $34,560 in the past. They live in his father’s house. He has never 
met or seen them, but talks with them monthly. They are in different schools. Applicant 
was the sole source of financial support for them until last month. He recently refused to 
provide additional support when one wanted to open a store. He told them he could not 
financially support them anymore.7 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a resident of Somalia. She came to the United States in 1993 
to help care for Applicant’s children. In 2013, she became a U.S. citizen. She lived with 
Applicant while she was in the United States. She moved back to Somalia in 2015 
because she missed living there. She lives there with a roommate. Applicant speaks with 
her monthly and sends her about $500 a month. If she needs more, Applicant will send 
more. Applicant is her sole source of support. During Applicant’s March 2016 background 
interview with a government investigator, he disclosed that his mother changed her name 
in 2013 because she feared her birth name might put her in danger when she returned to 
Somalia. Applicant indicated that she might return to the United States to live in the future. 
She owns a small lot of land in Somalia. She is attempting to sell it. Applicant returned to 
Somalia twice since he moved to the United States, once when he accompanied his 
mother when she moved back there. The second time was when his father was ill. He 
used his U.S. passport to travel.8 
 
 Applicant has two sisters who are citizens and residents of Somalia. They are both 
married to Somali citizens. Their husbands have more than one wife. They each have ten 
children. Applicant does not associate with the husbands. One sister owns a small store 
where she sells milk and cheese. He testified that he rarely contacts his sisters. He 
disclosed on his security clearance application (SCA) that he had quarterly contact with 
one of his sisters and annual contact with the other.9   
 
 Applicant has no assets in Somalia or the United States. He wants to give back to 
the United States because of the opportunities he has been afforded. Applicant provided 
a character letter from a friend, who was a former student of Applicant’s in Somalia in 
                                                          
6 Tr. 19-20, 23, 27-28, 38, 46. 
 
7 Tr. 28-30, 45-46; GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. 20-22, 26-27, 34, 36-40, 42-44, 46-49; GE 2.  
 
9 Tr. 23-26, 44-45; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
 
1979. He now lives in the United States. He noted that Applicant is a dedicated and hard-
working American.10 
 
Somalia11 
 
 Somalia is a federal parliamentary republic established in 2012, after years of 
factional fighting and anarchy following the 1991 collapse of the authoritarian socialist’s 
regime that had been in place since a 1969 coup. The United States formally recognized 
the Federal Government of Somalia in 2013.  
 
  The U.S. Department of State warns U.S. citizens to avoid travel to Somalia 
because of widespread terrorism and criminal activity. Terrorist groups operate with 
impunity throughout large parts of the country, including Mogadishu, and attack civilian, 
military and government targets and are responsible for kidnappings, bombings, murder, 
and illegal roadblocks. Other violent incidents are also common throughout Somalia. 
There is no U.S. embassy presence in Somalia.  
 
 The U.S. Department of State has assessed Mogadishu as being a critical threat 
location for terrorist activity directed at or affecting official U.S. Government interests. 
Pervasive and violent crime is an extension of the general state of insecurity in Somalia.  
 
 Terrorist groups impose their own interpretation of Islamic law and practice on 
other Muslims in Somalia, targeting and killing federal and government officials as non-
Muslims or apostates. They harass and threaten members of secular and faith-based 
humanitarian organizations, accusing them of seeking to convert Somalis to Christianity, 
and threaten to execute anyone suspected of converting to Christianity.  
 
 Somalia remained a safe haven for terrorists in 2016, due to the relative freedom 
of movement they utilize to obtain resources and funds, recruit fighters, and plan and 
mount operations in Somalia and neighboring countries. Somalia’s porous borders 
contribute to the regional insecurity. It does not have a central or shared terrorist 
screening watch, and does not possess biographic or biometric screening capabilities at 
points of entry.  
 
 Numerous human rights violations are reported, including executions without due 
process. The U.S. Department of State reported that in 2016 impunity was the norm. 
Civilian authorities did not maintain effective control of security forces and government 
authorities took minimal steps to prosecute and punish official who committed violations, 
particularly military and police officials accused of rape, killings, clan violence, and 
extortion of civilian.  
 
Human rights abuses included disappearance, torture and other cruel, inhuman, 
or degrading treatment or punishment; harsh prison conditions; arbitrary or politically 
                                                          
10 Tr. 17, 35; AE A. 
 
11 HE II, III.  
 
5 
 
 
motivated arrests and detention; denial of a fair trial; use of child soldiers; restrictions on 
freedom of speech and press, assembly, religion and movement; corruption; and 
trafficking in persons.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.”12 
 
 The United States has serious concerns about terrorist activities in Somalia. The 
U.S. Department of State has assessed Mogadishu as being a critical threat location for 
terrorist activity directed at or affecting official U.S. Government interests. Pervasive and 
violent crime is an extension of the general state of insecurity in Somalia. U.S. citizens 
are warned to avoid travel to Somalia because of widespread terrorism and criminal 
activity. Terrorist groups operate with impunity throughout large parts of the country, 
including Mogadishu, and attack civilian, military and government targets. Numerous 
human rights violations are reported, including executions without due process. Civilian 
authorities do not maintain effective control of security forces, and government authorities 
take minimal steps to prosecute and punish official who committed violations, particularly 
military and police officials accused of rape, killings, clan violence, and extortion of 
civilian.  
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of the United States residing in Somalia. His two 
sisters and six half-siblings are citizens and residents of Somalia. Applicant accompanied 
his mother to Somalia so she could reestablish her residence there. She was concerned 
for her safety and changed her name. Applicant is her sole source of financial support. 
After his father died, Applicant fulfilled his father’s wishes and has financially supported 
his half-siblings and assumed a parental role. Applicant’s contacts with his mother, 
siblings, and half-siblings, residing in Somalia, creates a heightened risk, a potential 
foreign influence concern, and a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) applies 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant’s mother is a U.S. citizen residing in Somalia. He has a close relationship 
with her. She lived with him in the United States for twenty years. He traveled with her to 
Somalia to help her relocate. He is her sole means of financial support. He sends her 
money each month. Although she is a U.S. citizen, her residence at this time is Somalia. 
She owns land there. She hopes to sell it. She changed her name because she was 
concerned about her safety. Applicant maintains regular contact with his half-siblings and 
provided them financial support until recently. He took on a parental role toward his half-
siblings, fulfilling his father’s wishes that he be responsible for them after he died. His 
maintains regular contact with one of his sisters. Applicant’s contact with his family is not 
casual and infrequent. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s close relationship with his mother and his parental 
role relationship with his half-siblings. Somalia is an unsafe place for those residing there, 
and especially for U.S. citizens. Terrorism and human rights abuses for people living there 
are rampant. I cannot find that it is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of 
having to choose between his mother, siblings, and his half-siblings, and the interests of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 1988. He has returned to Somalia twice 
since becoming a citizen, but both times related to his family. He is a devoted son. His 
mother lived with him in the United States and when she wanted to return to Somalia to 
live, he took her back. When his father was ill, Applicant went to Somalia to be with him. 
His dying father entrusted Applicant to be responsible for his half-siblings, a role that 
Applicant assumed. He maintains a closer relationship with one sister over the other, 
through monthly contact. His relationship with his family in Somalia is ongoing and not 
insignificant and creates a potential conflict of interest due to his loyalty them. AG ¶ 8(b) 
does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
9 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1988. He 
has strong and loyal family ties with relatives in Somalia. While those connections are 
commendable, they create a serious heightened risk and raise security concerns that are 
unmitigated. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate them under Guideline B, foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
