                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06060 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristine C. Spicker, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
J, Criminal Conduct, and E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
On August 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines J and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was undated and received at DOHA on August 
31, 2009. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On December 3, 
2009, Department Counsel amended the SOR and withdrew allegations ¶¶ 1.f, 2.b, 2.c, 
and 2.d, and added new allegations ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, 2.d, and 2.e, under Guideline E. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant answered the amended SOR in an undated response received by DOHA on 
January 4, 2010. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2009. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on January 7, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
January 26, 2010. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12. Applicant did not 
object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 3, 2010.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and denied all of 
the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He graduated from college in 2002. He is not married. 
He has an 11 year old daughter. He began working for a federal contractor in 2004 and 
has held a secret security clearance. He changed jobs in 2007 and works for a different 
federal contractor.1 
 
Applicant was arrested on April 5, 1998, and was charged with attempted grand 
larceny and possession of burglarious tools, both felonies. He was also charged with 
damage to property, a misdemeanor. Applicant explained that his compact disk system 
was stolen from his car. He became aware of the person he believed stole his property. 
He went to the person’s house on two occasions to confront him and have him return 
his property. The person was not home the third time Applicant went to the house, so he 
took a screw driver, that he brought with him, and attempted to break into the person’s 
car to retrieve what he believed was his compact disk system. The police were called 
and Applicant was arrested and charged. Applicant stated he explained the facts to the 
judge and prosecutor and the charges were nolle prossed. Applicant knew he was 
charged with felonies.2  
 
On May 26, 2000, Applicant was charged with reckless driving/speeding, a 
misdemeanor. He hired an attorney and went to court. He was found guilty of the 
charge. He stated he was unaware the charge was a misdemeanor.3 
 
On September 23, 2002, Applicant was charged with reckless driving, a 
misdemeanor. On October 31, 2002, he was found guilty of improper driving and 
received a fine. Applicant stated he was unaware that he was charged with a 
misdemeanor.4  
 
1 Tr. 26, 39-41, 75. 
 
2 Tr. 31-32, 66-68, 86-89. 
 
3 Tr. 53-56. 
 
4 Tr. 69. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
In December 2002, Applicant was working and got a new job. He told some 
coworkers that he was leaving his first job, but did not tell his present employer. Rather 
he left the job without giving notice to his employer. He stated he was not terminated 
and did not handle leaving his job in the correct manner.5  
 
On Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) dated February 25, 2003, he 
did not disclose he had been arrested and charged with two felonies in 1998 and three 
misdemeanors, one in 1998, one in 2000, and another in 2002. He stated he did not list 
the felonies because “they were thrown out” although he acknowledged he was arrested 
and charged. He stated he did not know the reckless driving charges were 
misdemeanors, so he did not list those either.6  
 
On January 5, 2004, Applicant was charged with fraud, a misdemeanor, and 
grand larceny, a felony. On May 14, 2004, he was found guilty of fraud and petit 
larceny, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to one year in prison for the fraud, which 
was suspended. On the petit larceny charge, he was sentenced to twelve months in 
prison, of which 11 months were suspended. He was also placed on probation for two 
years. He served his sentence on the weekends. Applicant was represented by an 
attorney. Applicant stated despite pleading guilty, he did not commit these offenses. He 
stated he pled guilty to the misdemeanor because the case was continued five times 
and he had just stated a new job and was missing too much work. He did not know 
which side requested the continuances.7  
 
Regarding the offenses, Applicant explained that he was at the barbershop and a 
friend came in and offered to sell him stereo equipment. He went home to get some 
money and returned and bought the stereo equipment. He then learned he needed 
money to pay for his daughter’s school. So he pawned the stereo equipment to get the 
money. A couple of days later he was contacted by the police and was told that the 
stereo equipment he had sold to the pawn shop was stolen. The property was stolen 
from the same car dealership where Applicant was working at that time. Applicant 
stated he did not know the property was stolen. When asked what happened with his 
job, Applicant stated he was fired when the employer learned he pled guilty to fraud and 
larceny of the equipment stolen from them. Applicant did not include on his SCA that he 
was fired from this job. He stated he did not know why he failed to disclose this 
information. He admitted this would be information that the government would want to 
5 Tr. 62-66. 
 
6 Tr. 42-44; GE 1. The SOR does not allege Applicant falsified the 2003 SCA. I have not considered this 
information for disqualifying purposed, but have considered it when analyzing the “whole-person” and 
determining Applicant’s credibility. 
 
7 Tr. 27-28, 34-35, 90-93. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
know about and was requested on his SCA. I did not find Applicant’s testimony 
credible.8  
 
Applicant completed a SCA on December 8, 2004. He did not list that he was 
charged with felonies in 1998. He explained he did not list the felonies because he 
misread the question. He did not list the January 5, 2004, felony arrest because he did 
not see the word “charged.” He did list this charge later in the SCA and divulged the 
January 5, 2004, misdemeanor, but did not list any of his other misdemeanor charges.9  
 
On September 7, 2005, while on probation, Applicant was charged with reckless 
driving/speeding, a misdemeanor. On December 13, 2005, he was found guilty and 
fined. He did not go to court.10 
 
On August 29, 2008, Applicant was charged with speeding and driving with a 
tinted or smoked windshield. He was found guilty and was ordered to pay a fine of $476. 
 
Applicant completed a SCA on November 15, 2006. Section 23 asked if in the 
last 7 years he had been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not 
already listed. Applicant answered “yes” but failed to divulge the September 7, 2005, 
conviction for reckless driving. He also failed to divulge the September 23, 2002, and 
the May 26, 2000, convictions for reckless driving.  
 
Section 23 also asked if Appellant had ever been charged with or convicted of a 
felony offense. He failed to divulge he was arrested for fraud and grand larceny in 1998, 
both felonies. He failed to divulge that when he was arrested on January 4, 2004, the 
original charges were felony fraud and felony grand larceny. He did divulge that he was 
convicted of a misdemeanor. He stated he did not think he had to divulge the 1998 
felony arrest because it was nolle prosque and he did not think it was on his record. He 
stated he did not divulge the 2004 arrest because he misunderstood the question and 
did not see the word “charged” in the question. He also stated that he was rushed when 
he completed the SCA, but then explained that it was not the November 15, 2006, 
application he was rushed on, but a different one he had completed. He stated he failed 
to divulge the information because it was an oversight. He explained he made a 
mistake.11 
 
Applicant testified that he was always forthcoming about his criminal offenses 
when he was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. 
When Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator on January 22, 2007, he told 
8 Tr. 29-31, 79-86; Applicant did not divulge that he had been fired from this job. This omission was not 
alleged on the SOR. I have not considered this information for disqualifying purposes, but have 
considered it when determining Applicant’s credibility and when analyzing the “whole-person.” 
 
9 Tr. 46-49. 
 
10 Tr. 56. 
 
11 Tr. 31-33, 35-39, 50-53, 62. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
the investigator that he pled guilty to “the original charges for petty larceny and 
obtaining money under false pretenses.” He did not tell the investigator that he was 
originally charged with grand larceny.12  
 
Applicant did not tell his security manager about his January 5, 2004 arrest. At 
some point his security manager learned of the conviction and confronted Applicant with 
the information.13  
 
Applicant signed a SCA on December 8, 2004, and re-certified it on November 7, 
2005. He explained about the offense of January 5, 2004 by stating the following:  
 
Purchase merchandise at a local barbershop. Short of cash a couple of 
days later, took merchandise to Cash Converters, cash converter call me 
to inform me that the merchandise was stolen. Went to court show 
receipts, court process was time consuming, missing hours at work, enter 
a plea bargain.14  
 
Applicant pled guilty to stealing the property and fraud. Applicant knew his 
statements were false and he and he intentionally provided false and misleading 
information on his SCA. Applicant also provided false and misleading information on his 
November 15, 2006, SCA when he provided the following statement:  
 
Regarding the misdemeanor offen[s]e. I purchase[d] a radio at the 
barbershop I got (sic) to. The guy I purchase[d] it from show[ed] a receipt 
which was from the internet, I believed a [P]aypal receipt with ebay logo 
on it. I thought it was legit so I bought it from him. A few days later I took it 
to Cash Converter because I miscalculated my money and I needed the 
cash. A couple of days later I received a phone call from the [city] police 
stating that it was stolen. I was in and out of court behind this missing 
days at work. My employer and I was getting tired of me missing days so I 
pleaded guilty to end it.15  
 
On December 20, 2006 Applicant provided false information to an OPM 
investigator when he was questioned about his 2004 conviction for larceny and fraud. 
He provided the investigator the same false and misleading explanation stating he did 
not know the property he bought at the barbershop was stolen. When in fact, Applicant 
actually stole the property and knew his statements were false as he had in fact pled 
guilty to stealing the property that eventually led to his larceny and fraud conviction.  
 
12 Tr. 56-61; GE 6, 10, 11. 
 
13 Tr. 76-79. 
 
14 GE 2. 
 
15 GE 3. 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person 
was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested five times from April 1998 to September 2005. He was 
charged in 1998 and again in 2004 with felonies. He pled guility to misdemeanor 
charges of larceny, fraud, and reckless driving. Appellant was sentenced to a year in 
prison for his larceny conviction, which was suspended. He was sentenced to twelve 
months in jail for the fraud conviction, of which 11 months were suspended. He was on 
probation for two years. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a seven-year history of criminal conduct, the most recent offense 
occurring in 2005. While on probation he committed another misdemeanor. He admitted 
the property was stolen from the car dealer where he worked and that he pled guilty to 
the offenses, but now denies the offenses. Applicant lied about his involvement 
regarding the larceny and fraud offenses. I find (a) does not apply because no evidence 
was offered to show his conduct is unlikely to recur. I find his conduct casts doubt on his 
 
8 
 
 
reliability, good judgment and trustworthiness. Applicant did not provide evidence to 
convince me he did not commit the offenses he pled guilty to. Based on Applicant’s 
testimony and lack of credibility at his hearing I find he failed to provide any substantive 
evidence that he has changed his way and is successfully rehabilitated. I find mitigating 
conditions (c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant intentionally and deliberately failed to divulge he was charged with 
felonies. He also provided misleading and false information on his SCAs and to the 
OPM investigator. Applicant’s numerous arrests and convictions are also a personal 
conduct concern. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant’s 
actions and false statements.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and conclude 
none apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a college graduate. He 
has worked for a federal contractor since 2004, and held a security clearance. Applicant 
has a history of criminal conduct. He has been charged with felonies and 
misdemeanors. He was charged with felony larceny and fraud and pled guilty to the 
reduced misdemeanor offenses. He stated he was tired of the delay in the process so 
he accepted a plea agreement, but he was not guilty. He also admitted that the property 
that he was accused of stealing was taken from his employer. He was later fired by the 
employer because of his plea. He did not list he was fired on his SCA. He had no 
explanation for why he did not disclose this information. Applicant’s testimony 
throughout the hearing lacked candor, he was not believable, and I find he deliberately 
lied. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his Criminal 
Conduct and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1e:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.e:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
