                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-09983 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on March 2, 2006 (Gov X 4). On July 31, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for foreign preference under Guideline C (Gov X 1). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on 
August 5, 2009 (Gov X 2). 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 19, 2009. He admitted one allegation, 
and denied the other allegation. He provided an explanation for his denial of allegation 
SOR 1.b. He elected to have the matter decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing (Gov X 3). Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
October 22, 2009. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
November 4, 2009, and was provided the opportunity to file objections, and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not 
submit additional information. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2010.  
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact.  Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR 1.a, and denied the 
factual allegation in SOR 1.b.   
 
 Applicant is a 73-year-old civil engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
for over eight years. He has both a bachelor's and master's degree in engineering from 
Canadian universities. He is seeking a security clearance to permit him to work on 
United States government projects overseas. Applicant was born in Trinidad and 
Tobago, came to the United States in 1980, and has been a United States citizen since 
May 1988. Applicant received a United States passport as early as August 21, 1988 
(Gov X 4). His present United States passport was issued on January 31, 2008, and 
expires on January 30, 2018. Applicant used his United States passport to enter 
Trinidad and Tobago in August 2008. At the time, Applicant also held a valid Trinidad 
and Tobago passport (Gov X 5).  
 
 Applicant learned of business opportunities in Trinidad and Tobago in 1996. He 
was encouraged by his employer to seek dual citizenship with Trinidad and Tobago to 
permit him to engage in business there. Trinidad and Tobago citizenship is required to 
be a business owner in the country. Applicant applied for and was granted Trinidad and 
Tobago citizenship in December 1996. He received a Trinidad and Tobago passport 
which was to expire in December 2006. He used the Trinidad passport to enter Granada 
in March 2006. He applied for and received an extension of the Trinidad and Tobago 
passport in September 2006, after he was interviewed by security investigators 
concerning his application for a security clearance. The passport expired on September 
27, 2008 (Gov X. 5).  
 
 Applicant established a limited engineering company in Trinidad and Tobago in 
December 1996, to enable him to seek business in that country for his employer. 
Applicant was the principal owner of the business, and responsible for decision-making 
in the company. Applicant's business function was to generate business projects in 
Trinidad and Tobago for his employer. All work would be done by Applicant's employer. 
However, the business venture did not generate work in Trinidad and Tobago and made 
no income in that country. He and his employer bid on potential work in Trinidad and 
Tobago, but they were not awarded any contracts. Since there is no work in Trinidad 
and Tobago, there is no reason for him to continue to be a dual citizen or have a 
Trinidad and Tobago passport. In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he and 
his employer decided not to renew his Trinidad and Tobago passport and he 
established his intention to relinquish his Trinidad and Tobago citizenship. (Gov. X 3).  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he may be prone to provide information or make 
 
4 
 
 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States (AG ¶ 9). Applicant was 
born in Trinidad and Tobago but left that country in 1961. He came to the United States 
in 1980 and became a United States citizen in 1988. He requested and received 
Trinidad and Tobago citizenship in 1996 for business purposes. He applied for and 
received a Trinidad and Tobago passport in 1996, and used it to enter another country 
in 2006. These factors raise Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC) AG ¶ 
10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming 
a United States citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This 
includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport). His 
acquisition of Trinidad and Tobago citizenship also raises FP DC AG ¶ 10(b) (action to 
acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen).   
 
 The government produced substantial evidence through Applicant's admission 
and statements in response to interrogatories, and established the disqualifying 
condition in AG ¶ 10(a). The burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under foreign preference. Applicant 
has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a mitigating condition, and 
the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the government. 
 
The United States Supreme Court has recognized a right under the United States 
Constitution for United States citizens to have dual citizenship with another country 
(Afroyim v. Rusk, 387 U.S. 253 (1967)). However, eligibility for a security clearance 
must be determined by application of the disqualifying conditions for foreign preference 
under the factual circumstances. The President in promulgating the disqualifying 
conditions could have specified that dual citizenship by itself was a security concern, but 
he did not. The rule that was promulgated raises a security concern based on an 
exercise of dual foreign citizenship. Applicant provided a copy of his Trinidad and 
Tobago passport in response to interrogatories. The passport shows it was used in 
August 2006 to enter another country. The passport clearly shows it was to expire in 
September 2006, was renewed before it expired, and expired again in September 2008.  
He has not renewed the passport since it expired in September 2008. Applicant does 
not possess a current foreign passport. Applicant's possession of an expired, not 
current, passport is not considered an exercise of dual citizenship under FP DC AG ¶ 
10(a)(1).  
Applicant sought dual citizenship with Trinidad and Tobago in 1996 even though 
he had become a United States citizen in 1988. The dual citizenship with Trinidad and 
Tobago was for business purposes and not based on a preference for Trinidad and 
Tobago over the United States. Since dual citizenship was obtained to facilitate 
business opportunities, it was not based solely on Applicant's birth in Trinidad and 
Tobago. Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition (FP MC) AG 11(a) (Dual citizenship is 
based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a foreign country) does not apply. 
Applicant established FP MC AG ¶ 11(b) (The individual has expressed a 
willingness to renounce dual citizenship). In response to the SOR, Applicant stated he 
and his employer decided there were no longer viable business opportunities in Trinidad 
 
5 
 
 
and Tobago. He decided not to renew his Trinidad and Tobago passport and to 
relinquish his dual citizenship with Trinidad and Tobago. The accumulated evidence 
does not show Applicant has a preference for Trinidad and Tobago over the United 
States. He became a dual citizen not because he had a preference for Trinidad and 
Tobago over the United States but for the limited purpose of doing business in that 
country. Applicant has mitigated security concerns for foreign preference raised by his 
exercise of the rights of foreign citizenship with Trinidad and Tobago by seeking 
citizenship and a passport from that country. 
Whole Person Concept  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 Applicant has been a United States citizen for over 20 years. He became a dual 
citizen of his country of birth, Trinidad and Tobago, for business purposes. He exercised 
his dual citizenship by obtaining a Trinidad and Tobago passport which is now expired. 
Applicant's dual citizenship with Trinidad and Tobago and his receiving a Trinidad and 
Tobago passport which is now expired for business purposes  does not show a 
preference for Trinidad and Tobago over the United States. Access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
