 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-14683 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct), J (Criminal Conduct), and F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 6, 2006. On 
July 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines E and J. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 3, 2009; answered it on August 17, 2009; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
August 24, 2009. On September 10, 2009, DOHA sent Applicant a supplemental 
statement of reasons (captioned as an amendment), citing security concerns under 
Guideline F. Applicant responded by facsimile transmission on September 29, 2009. 
 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 16, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on October 20, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 
27, 2009, scheduling the hearing for November 17, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until December 4, 2009, to 
permit Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX C, 
D, and E, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX 
C, D, and E is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on November 25, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 3.b. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old drawing clerk employed by a defense contractor since 
July 2006. He is responsible for handling ship drawings. He graduated from high school 
in June 1998, and then attended college from August 1998 until December 2004 on a 
football scholarship. He did not receive a degree. After four years his scholarship 
ended, and he could not afford to complete his degree requirements (Tr. 45). He 
recently was accepted at a local university, where he intends to earn the 18 credit hours 
he needs to obtain a degree (Tr. 42-43). He underwent a background check as a 
condition of employment in an airport mailroom in June 2000, but he has never held a 
security clearance.  
 
 Applicant was married in July 2009, and he has a son who was born in August 
2009 (Tr. 40-41). His spouse is an industrial engineer working at a naval base (Tr. 41).  
 
 In July 2002, while in college, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
maintaining a dwelling place for the sale of marijuana, possession of marijuana, and 
selling or delivering marijuana, all felonies (GX 8 at 4). Applicant told a security 
investigator that his arrest occurred as a result of sharing an apartment with two 
roommates, one of whom was selling marijuana. The apartment lease was in 
Applicant’s name, but his roommates contributed to the rent (Tr. 89-91). His arrest 
occurred after his two roommates moved out of the apartment and was based on 
information from an undercover police officer who had purchased marijuana from 
Applicant’s roommate. Applicant admitted to a security investigator that he was present 
in the apartment when his roommate sold the marijuana to the undercover police officer 
 
3 
 
 
(GX 4 at 4). At the hearing, he testified that he witnessed two or three other marijuana 
sales (Tr. 86). He has had no contact with his marijuana-selling former roommate since 
2002 (Tr. 94). 
 
Applicant pleaded guilty to one misdemeanor count of selling marijuana, on the 
advice of his attorney, and in accordance with a plea agreement. The other charges 
were dismissed. He was placed on unsupervised probation for six months, fined about 
$300, required to perform 75 hours of community service, and required to attend alcohol 
and drug awareness classes. He paid the fine, served his community service, attended 
the classes, and completed his probation (GX 2 at 5). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant insisted that he was not guilty of selling marijuana. He 
testified he trusted his lawyer, who assured him that if he pleaded guilty to a 
misdemeanor the conviction would be stricken from his record after he completed his 
community service (Tr. 95-96).  
 
 In June 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with carrying a concealed 
weapon and possession of marijuana. He told a security investigator he was driving his 
roommate’s car when he was stopped by police while leaving a known drug-trafficking 
area. When he was stopped, he removed his pistol from the glove box and placed it in 
plain view. The police found a small quantity of marijuana in the trunk. Applicant told the 
investigator that all charges were dismissed and his pistol was returned to him (GX 2 at 
6). The court records reflect that Applicant appeared in court pro se, pleaded not guilty 
to the marijuana charge and was acquitted. The court records also reflect that he 
pleaded guilty to the weapon offense. Two “findings” boxes are checked, one indicating 
he was convicted of the weapon offense and one indicating he was acquitted. His pistol, 
which was properly registered, was returned to him (GX 7). 
 
Although the court records reflect that Applicant pleaded guilty to the weapon 
offense in 2004, he testified at the hearing that he did not plead guilty. He testified he 
did not understand why his weapon would have been returned to him if he had pleaded 
guilty and had been convicted (Tr. 102, 104, 109). 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in December 2006, 
he disclosed an arrest for carrying a concealed weapon in August 2000, but he did not 
disclose his arrest for carrying a concealed weapon in June 2004. At the hearing, he 
testified he had only one weapon-related arrest and that it occurred in 2004. He testified 
that the date of his arrest reflected on his security clearance application was incorrect, 
as a result of his negligence (Tr. 97, 101).  
 
On the same security clearance application, Applicant answered “no” to question 
23d, asking if he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense related to 
alcohol or drugs. He did not disclose the marijuana-related charges in 2002 and 2004. 
He testified he did not disclose the charges and conviction in 2002 because his lawyer 
informed him that they would not be on his record (Tr. 97-98), but he offered no 
 
4 
 
 
explanation for not disclosing that he was charged with possession of marijuana in 
2004. 
 
Applicant also answered “no” to question 24a, asking if he had ever illegally used 
any controlled substance since the age of 16 or in the last seven years. On October 30, 
2008, he executed a sworn affidavit containing the substance of an interview with a 
security investigator (GX 4 at 6-8). The affidavit was handwritten by the investigator (Tr. 
114). Applicant initialed each page, and he signed and swore to its contents on the last 
page. The affidavit includes the following description of his previous marijuana use: 
 
Since I was 15 or 16 years old I smoked marijuana on the 
weekends or at parties socially. I would spend about $40.00/month for my 
marijuana social usage. I have never sold, transported or distributed 
marijuana or any other illegal drug. Since the visit & finger printing at the 
[redacted] Police States in 2002 I have not used marijuana, bought 
marijuana or any other illegal substance. I had stopped smoking marijuana 
even before going to court in 2002 and pleading guilty. I have not and will 
not smoke marijuana or any other drug in the present or future. 
.     .     . 
Since 2002 I realized my immaturity with smoking marijuana and 
the type of friends, roommates and company I kept. I have since grown 
up, went on the play football, professionally and surrounded myself with 
better people and friends. There is no drug usage or selling in my current 
or future life.  
 
 Applicant’s affidavit was the basis for the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.c that he falsified 
his security clearance application by deliberately failing to disclose marijuana use within 
the last seven years of submitting the application. At the hearing, he testified the 
affidavit summarized the results of several interviews. He denied telling the investigators 
that he used marijuana until 2002. He testified that he stopped using marijuana while he 
was in middle school. He stated that he did not use it in high school and college, 
because it was inconsistent with being a good athlete and he was subject to random 
drug tests (Tr. 125-28). 
 
 Applicant also disputed the implication in the affidavit that he used marijuana 
regularly. He testified he meant to say only that he used marijuana more than once (Tr. 
124-25). 
 
In response to questions on his security clearance application about financial 
delinquencies, Applicant disclosed a $600 student loan that had been more than 180 
days delinquent, but he stated on his application that the loan was satisfied. His credit 
report dated September 10, 2009, reflected an unpaid medical bill for $143, with last 
activity in July 2006, and numerous student loans referred for collection and totaling 
about $40,134 (GX 10). He admitted he owed the medical bill. In response to DOHA 
interrogatories in May 2008, he responded that he had called the doctor’s office and set 
a date to pay the bill in full. He testified that the bill is from his regular doctor, but as of 
 
5 
 
 
the date of the hearing the bill remained unpaid, because he had not had an occasion to 
visit his doctor (Tr. 57).  
 
 Applicant testified the student loans were obtained by his parents on his behalf. 
Initially, he did not make any payments on the loans because he thought it was unfair 
for his parents to expect him to make payments on a loan they obtained for him (Tr. 33). 
He testified he eventually made a $50 payment because his mother was “on [his] back.” 
After the hearing, he presented documentary evidence of a $40.19 payment in May 
2008, followed by regular payments from December 2008 through August 2009. As of 
October 31, 2009, his balance was $36,095 (Tr. 64; AX D at 2). He testified his monthly 
payments on the student loans are deducted automatically from his checking account 
(Tr. 62). His student loan payments are now current. He testified he has requested that 
payments be deferred for two months, and he will then continue making payments of 
$175 per month (Tr. 34). His employer will reimburse him for his college expenses when 
he returns to school (Tr. 71-72). 
 
 In February 2007, Applicant was working aboard an aircraft carrier and had an 
interim confidential clearance. His supervisor instructed him to retrieve ship’s drawings 
from a classified vault, not realizing that he was not cleared to enter that vault. Applicant 
retrieved the drawings as ordered. A subsequent investigation determined that no 
classified material was lost or unaccounted for, but the possibility of compromise could 
not be ruled out. Applicant was required to undergo additional security training, but he 
was not otherwise disciplined. The record does not reflect what action, if any, was taken 
against his supervisor (GX 9). 
 
 Applicant and his spouse recently bought a house for about $205,000, on which 
the monthly payments are about $1,500 (Tr. 42). According to a budget he submitted 
after the hearing, he and his spouse have a total net monthly income of about $4,400 
and expenses of $3,628, leaving a net remainder of about $872 (AX E). The budget 
does not specifically reflect any payments on the student loans.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
6 
 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s two arrests in July 2002 and June 2004 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b). It also alleges he falsified his security clearance application by deliberately 
failing to disclose a firearms offense, drug-related charges in July 2002 and June 2004,  
marijuana use, and a conviction of selling marijuana in 2002 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.f). Finally, it 
 
7 
 
 
alleges that he entered a restricted area in February 2007 without the requisite security 
clearance (SOR ¶ 1.g). 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The disqualifying condition relevant to the allegations of falsification is AG ¶ 16(a) 
(deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire). When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, 
the government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not 
prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant was a mature, well-educated adult when he submitted his security 
clearance application, but he had no previous experience with the security clearance 
process. He admitted that he was negligent in completing the form, but negligence does 
not constitute deliberate falsification. I am satisfied that his response to question 23b, 
asking about firearms offenses, was the product of negligence. The court records reflect 
only one firearms offense, and it occurred in 2004, not 2000 as reported by Applicant. 
AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable to his answer to question 23b. 
 
 Applicant answered “no” to question 23d, asking about drug-related charges, and 
he did not disclose his arrests in July 2002 and June 2004. His explanation for not 
disclosing the arrest and conviction in 2002 was that he relied on his attorney’s 
assurance that they would be stricken from his record. He did not explain why he did not 
disclose that he had been charged with possession of marijuana in 2004. He did not 
explain why he did not follow the guidance on the application to report charges as well 
as convictions and to “report information regardless of whether the record in your case 
has been ‘sealed’ or otherwise stricken from the court record.” I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is 
raised by his answer to question 23d. 
 
 Applicant answered “no” to question 24, asking if he had illegally used any 
controlled substance during the seven years preceding his application. He disputed the 
accuracy of an affidavit suggesting that he continued to use marijuana until 2002, even 
though he initialed, signed, and swore to the accuracy of the affidavit. After considering 
all the evidence and observing Applicant’s demeanor at the hearing, I am satisfied that 
he did not intend to admit regularly using marijuana until 2002. I am also satisfied that 
he refrained from using it while playing college football and thereafter. His failure to 
challenge the accuracy of the affidavit when he swore to it is consistent with his 
 
8 
 
 
negligent execution of his security clearance application, as demonstrated by his 
incorrect response to question 23b and inaccurate reporting of his student loans. I 
conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable to his answer to question 24. 
 
 The disqualifying conditions relevant to Applicant’s arrests and convictions in July 
2002 and June 2004 and his security violation in February 2007 are as follows: 
AG 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; 
AG 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as  . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; and 
AG 16(g): association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 The evidence reflects that Applicant used marijuana in high school, that he 
tolerated his college roommate’s drug dealing in his house, that he pleaded guilty to 
selling marijuana in July 2002, that he was convicted of a concealed weapon offense in 
June 2004, and that he was involved in a security violation in February 2007. I am 
satisfied that the security violation was inadvertent and the product of Applicant’s 
compliant personality and his supervisor’s negligence. However, the remaining conduct 
is sufficient to raise all the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant’s association with persons involved in criminal activity, i.e., his drug-
dealing roommate, was not specifically alleged in the SOR. I have considered this 
conduct for the limited purpose of deciding which adjudicative guidelines are applicable; 
to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider 
whether Applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; and as part of my whole-
 
9 
 
 
person analysis. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations 
omitted). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a), (c), (d), (e), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
Security concerns raised by falsification of a security clearance questionnaire 
may be mitigated if “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 
17(a). Applicant submitted the questionnaire in December 2006. He did not disclose his 
July 2002 arrest and conviction or correct the date of his concealed weapon offense 
until he was interviewed by a security investigator and confronted with the evidence in 
August 2007. This mitigating condition is not established. 
Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Several of 
Applicant’s offenses were serious. He was arrested for felonies in 2002 and 2004, and 
his falsification of his security questionnaire was a felony, as discussed below under 
Guideline J. His misconduct was not infrequent, and it did not occur under unique 
circumstances.  
The second prong of AG ¶ 17(c) (“so much time has passed”) focuses on 
whether the conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). 
Applicant’s last arrest was in June 2004. The security violation in February 2007 
was inadvertent and largely the fault of his supervisor. Since his arrest for carrying a 
concealed weapon, he has married, become a father, and bought a home. He is 
financially secure. On the other hand, he has allowed his student loans to become 
delinquent, falsified his security clearance questionnaire, and ignored a financial 
obligation to his doctor. After considering all the evidence, I am not satisfied that he has 
demonstrated reform or rehabilitation. Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not 
established. 
 
10 
 
 
Security concerns based on personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). This mitigating condition is established for 
Applicant’s drug-related conduct, but not the weapon offense or his falsifications. He 
completed the court-ordered counseling, no longer associates with drug dealers, and 
does not use illegal drugs. 
 Security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). 
The record does not reflect the extent to which Applicant has disclosed his criminal 
record to supervisors, coworkers, and family. His failure to fully disclose it on his 
security clearance application suggests less than full disclosure. I conclude this 
mitigating condition is not established. 
Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “association with persons involved 
in criminal activity has ceased.” AG ¶ 17(g). This mitigating condition is established 
because Applicant has no contact with his former roommate who sold drugs. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Paragraph 2.a of the SOR cross-alleges the conduct in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b as 
criminal conduct. Paragraph 2.b cross-alleges the falsifications alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c-1.f 
as felonies in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J. Applicant’s arrests and convictions in July 2002 
and June 2004, and his false answer to question 23d on his security questionnaire are 
sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 31(a) and (c), shifting the burden 
to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). Security concerns also may 
be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). For the reasons set out above in my discussion of Guideline 
E, I conclude that neither of these mitigating conditions is established. None of the other 
enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are applicable. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges unresolved student loans totaling about $40,134 (SOR ¶ 3.a) 
and a delinquent medical bill for $143 (SOR ¶ 3.b). The concern under this guideline is 
set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant allowed his student loans to become 
delinquent because he disagreed with his family about his obligation to pay them. It also 
shows that he owes his doctor $143 and has repeatedly promised to pay the debt, but 
he had not done so by the time the record closed.  
 
Applicant apparently is financially secure. He was unwilling to repay his student 
loans until he was cajoled into paying them by his mother in May 2008. He has simply 
neglected to pay his doctor bill. His conduct raises two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s debts are 
recent and one remains unresolved. Only two debts are involved. They did not arise 
under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The student loans apparently are 
current, thereby reducing Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or the temptation to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. The small amount involved in the medical bill 
($143) is not likely to make him vulnerable to pressure or to engage in illegal acts, but 
 
12 
 
 
Applicant’s disregard of his obligation to pay it casts doubt on his reliability and 
trustworthiness. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). This mitigating condition is not applicable 
because there is no evidence that the debts arose because of conditions lbeyond 
Applicant’s control. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not applicable because there is no evidence of financial 
counseling and the medical debt is not resolved. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition is established for 
Applicant’s student loans but not for the medical debt. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not applicable because Applicant has admitted the debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
13 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines E, J, and F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a mature, well-educated 
adult. He made some bad decisions in college and early adulthood. He pleaded guilty in 
July 2002 because he was concerned about his criminal record, and his concern carried 
over to his falsification of his security clearance application. He demonstrated a lack of a 
sense of obligation regarding his student loans and the medical bill. He may have 
turned the corner with his recent marriage and fatherhood, but it is too soon to 
determine whether he has left his irresponsible lifestyle behind. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines E, J, 
and F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct, criminal 
conduct, and financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:     Against Applicant 
 
 
14 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
