 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07705 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On December 27, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under the guidelines for alcohol consumption and personal conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On July 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 8, 2009, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing twelve 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy the following day. Applicant received the 
FORM on September 28, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. Applicant did not submit any additional information. On 
January 8, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in the SOR. 
Those admissions are incorporated in the findings below.   
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He has four adult children from a former marriage. In 
June 1978, he began working as a mechanic for a defense contractor. He was granted 
a security clearance in December 1996. (Item 5; 10.) 
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse and treatment. He began 
consuming alcohol at the age of 13, with regular use beginning at age 17. (Item 9 at 
132.)  In 1978, he was charged with Driving Under the Influence. On August 6, 2006, he 
sought inpatient treatment for alcohol abuse in order to maintain his employment. (Item 
5 at 50.) He stated that he was consuming 8 to 10 drinks of whiskey or beer a day. (Id.) 
According to a physician, he was discharged with a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependent on 
August 11, 2006.  
 
 Six months later, on January 7, 2008, Applicant was readmitted to the inpatient 
treatment program and diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent, Nicotine Dependent, and 
Alcohol Withdrawal Syndrome by the medical director. He was consuming “three to four 
drinks and six to eight beers” on a daily basis. (Id. at 132.) His blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) was 0.279 on admission. He admitted that he smoked marijuana 
once or twice a year, and last used it in June 2007. He also noted that he had a 
previous history of using cocaine, with his last use of cocaine in 2002. (Id.) He was 
discharged on January 19, 2008. In an April 2008 interview, he noted that after he 
successfully completed treatment and returned to work, his employer gave him a 
reprimand and warned him that similar conduct should not happen again. He stated that 
he continues to drink an occasional beer, but also stated that he did not intend to drink 
alcohol in the future. (Item 7 at 4.)      
 
 Applicant readmitted himself to an inpatient alcohol treatment program on June 
30, 2008, claiming he relapsed four to six weeks ago. His BAC was 0.287. During his 
admission intake, he could not “remember consuming more than one beer and ‘3-4’ 
drinks.’” (Id. at 222.) He stopped taking the medicine prescribed for him during the 
January 2008 admission a week after he left the program. (Id.) He was discharged on 
July 27, 2008. He received a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence and General Anxiety 
Disorder by a physician. (Id. at 250.) 
   
 
3 
 
 
 On August 29, 2008, Applicant voluntarily entered the treatment facility for the 
fourth time with a BAC of 0.189. He stated that he “’Just started to get bad again & I 
didn’t want it to get as bad as it was.’” (Sic). A physician diagnosed him with Alcohol 
Dependence, Nicotine Dependence, and Alcohol Withdrawal Syndrome. (Item 9 at 339.) 
He was discharged on September 1, 2008. In November 2008, he completed a set of 
interrogatories. He indicated that he last consumed alcohol in August 2008 and did not 
intend to consume it in the future. (Item 6 at 2.) He did not submit any evidence 
regarding further participation in outpatient assistance programs or documentation of 
consistent sobriety since then.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified his answers to three 
questions in the e-QIP by failing to disclose certain information: (1) Section 23: Your 
Police Record on the e-QIP: he did not disclose his 1978 alcohol offense; (2) Section 
24(a): Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity: he did not disclose that he used 
marijuana up to 2007; and (3) Section 24(b): he did not disclose that he used cocaine 
and marijuana while holding a security clearance. In his Answer, he admitted all 
falsification allegations.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
 
4 
 
 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern, five of which 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
5 
 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 In 1978, Applicant received a DUI. In August 2006, he entered an inpatient 
treatment program for alcohol abuse because his job was in jeopardy. Subsequently, he 
voluntarily entered treatment in January 2008, June 2008, and August 2008. At the time 
of each admission, he had a high BAC and received a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependent 
from a physician in the treatment program. The evidence potentially raised all five of the 
above disqualifications.  
After the government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden shifted 
to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns AG ¶ 23 
provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has a 30-year history of 
abusing alcohol, spanning from at least 1978 to August 2008. Given the frequency and 
long history of alcohol abuse, his behavior casts doubt on his current trustworthiness 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. Although Applicant recognizes his 
alcoholism, he has not established a pattern of sustained rehabilitation and sobriety, 
which is necessary to apply AG ¶ 23(b). Applicant has a history of treatment and 
relapses, eliminating the application of AG ¶ 23(c). He did not provide any evidence to 
 
6 
 
 
demonstrate a sufficient pattern of abstinence or a favorable prognosis from a duly 
qualified professional. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government alleged in ¶ 2 of the SOR that Applicant’s deliberate failure to 
disclose his 1978 DUI, drug abuse history, and use of illegal substances while holding a 
security clearance in his e-QIP may raise disqualifications under AG ¶ 15. 
 
AG ¶ 16 sets out seven conditions that could raise security concerns and be 
disqualifying. Two of them may be applicable in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, 
or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. 
 
Applicant admitted the three falsification allegations contained in the SOR. That 
admission raised a potential disqualification under AG ¶ 16(a). He also acknowledged 
that he used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance, which is evidence of his 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations pertaining to the safeguarding of 
protected information and raises a potential disqualification under AG ¶ 16(c).  
AG ¶ 17 includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to trigger the application of any 
mitigating condition listed under AG ¶ 17.  He did not make an attempt to disclose the 
information prior to being interviewed about it, as required under AG ¶ 17(a). His history 
of alcohol and illegal drug use is serious and not minor. It is relatively recent and long-
standing. His trustworthiness and judgment are in question. Hence, AG ¶ 17(c) does not 
apply. Although he acknowledged the problem, he has not documented a pattern of 
rehabilitation sufficient to alleviate the possibility of a recurrence. AG ¶ 17(d) does not 
apply. There is insufficient evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 17(b) and AG ¶ 
17(e). Based on the evidence, AG ¶ 17(f) and AG ¶ 17(g) are irrelevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 49-year-old divorced 
man and father of four adult children. He has abused alcohol most of his adult life (30 
years) and used illegal substances for a period of time up to 2007. While his candid 
admissions of his history of alcohol abuse are noteworthy, he failed to document his 
intentions not to consume alcohol since August 2008. He did not provide any 
independent evidence of consistent rehabilitative efforts since that time, or evidence 
that he has gained significant insight or personal skills that will assure future alcohol 
abstinence or prevent illegal drug behavior. His long-term abuse of alcohol and 
occasional illegal drug use raise concerns about his reliability, judgment, and ability to 
comply with rules and regulations. An equal security concern is Applicant’s intentional 
failure to divulge his drug use on the e-QIP application. He readily admitted that during 
his first inpatient treatment program in 2006 he was concerned that his alcoholism 
would affect his employment. The government imposes a special trust in one who holds 
a security clearance and relies on a person to be honest and truthful regardless of the 
consequences. His actions raise security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption and personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
 
  
 
 
9 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c.:  Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
