 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-03334 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 1, 2006. On June 
12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines G and E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 26, 2009; answered it on July 15, 2009; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 
17, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 9, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on October 20, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 
27, 2009, scheduling the hearing for November 19, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 12 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until December 4, 2009 to 
enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX E 
through G, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to 
AX E through G is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I.1 DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 4, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.j 
and 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old mainframe technician employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since June 2008. He is a high 
school graduate. He received a security clearance in June 2000 and retained it as of the 
date of the hearing (GX at 28; Tr. 6). 
 
Applicant was married in March 1984 and divorced in August 2002. No children 
were born during the marriage. He described the break-up of his marriage as “nasty,” 
“messy,” accompanied by financial problems, and involving a dispute over the 
disposition of the family home (Tr. 33, 74, 82-83). He has been in a “committed 
relationship” with a registered pharmacist since April 2007. They have lived together 
since June 2008 (AX C-1). 
 
Applicant previously worked for federal contactors from June 1999 to June 2008. 
An annual performance appraisal for the period ending in June 2001 rated him as 
“exemplary,” the highest rating (AX A-1). A probationary performance review from his 
current employer, dated October 1, 2008, rated him as very knowledgeable, self-
motivated, detail-oriented, creative, dedicated, and a team player (AX A-2).  
 
 Applicant’s agency received a Department of Defense Joint Meritorious Unit 
Award in October 2002 (AX A-3). He was personally commended on several occasions 
for his work with a previous employer (AX A-4 and A-5). In his current job, he has 
continued to gather frequent commendations for his expertise, dedication, and attention 
to detail (AX A-5 through A-8). 
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I referred to the three post-hearing submissions as AX D through F. I have corrected the 
lettering to reflect that AX D was admitted during the hearing and that AX E through G were submitted 
after the hearing.  
 
3 
 
 
 In May 1999, Applicant was arrested for operating a motor vehicle while 
intoxicated (OWI), after he struck another vehicle that was stopped for a red light. He 
failed several field sobriety tests and declined to take a breathalyzer test because he 
believed it would be used against him in the processing of his security clearance 
application (GX 7 at 2; GX 12 at 2). In July 1999, he was sentenced to 120 days in jail, 
with all but two days suspended. He was placed on unsupervised probation for one year 
and fined $1,000 (GX 4 at 2). He was required to pay $225 for court-appointed attorney 
fees, pay restitution of $250 for damage to the victim’s vehicle, submit to a substance 
abuse evaluation at his own expense, and submit to treatment if the evaluation 
indicated it was needed (GX 11). He was evaluated and diagnosed with alcohol abuse. 
He testified that the counseling consisted of one session lasting one or two hours and 
was not very effective (Tr. 51).  
 
 In September 1999, Applicant submitted an affidavit to a security investigator. In 
his affidavit, he stated he began consuming alcohol in 1976, while he was in high 
school. From 1976 to 1979, he consumed about three beers a day during the week and 
about 20 beers on the weekend. He abstained from alcohol from 1979 to 1990 or 1991, 
and then began drinking about five beers a week. From October 1998 to June 1999, he 
was unemployed and depressed, and he drank 60 to 70 beers a week. He then reduced 
his consumption to about five beers a week plus five or six beers on his bowling night 
(GX 12 at 2). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant recanted parts of his September 1999 affidavit. He 
testified that he did not begin consuming alcohol until 1995, and that he did not recall 
telling the investigator that he began drinking in 1976 (Tr. 57).  
 
 Applicant’s OWI arrest in May 1999 was not his first instance of driving while 
intoxicated. He testified that his drinking and driving occurred when he went bowling, 
and that he drove while under the influence of alcohol at least once a week before his 
arrest (Tr. 52-53). 
 
 In April 2003, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated (DWI) (GX 4 at 
2). He was stopped for erratic driving and found to have a blood-alcohol level of .18%. 
He pleaded guilty to careless and imprudent driving and was ordered to attend group 
counseling sessions three times per week for three weeks. He entered a clinical 
intervention program in June 2003 and completed it in July 2003 (GX 3 at 11-12). 
 
 Applicant was again arrested for DWI in March 2004 (GX 4 at 2). He fell asleep 
at a traffic light after leaving a bowling alley. His car rolled forward and struck another 
car. He drove away from the scene but was arrested. His blood-alcohol was .20%. He 
pleaded guilty to careless and imprudent driving and was ordered to attend weekend 
treatment (GX 2 at 3). He completed the program in June 2004 (GX at 14). 
 
 Applicant was arrested in March 2005 for driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI). He was convicted and placed on probation for two years and ordered to seek 
counseling (GX 1 at 25; GX 2 at 3). He attended counseling three times a week from 
 
4 
 
 
August 2005 to January 2006 (GX 3 at 5). He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent and 
suffering from severe depression that resulted from the death of his parents and his 
estrangement from his sister for fifteen years (GX 2 at 5; AX B-1 at 4). The counseling 
was provided by a “certified reciprocal alcohol and other drug abuse counselor” 
(CRADC)2, with a bachelor’s degree in social work, who was licensed to provide 
intervention and treatment for adult outpatient DUI evaluation and DUI risk education 
(AX E, F, and G). Applicant testified that the CRADC was the first to “get through [his] 
head” and convince him to make drastic changes in his lifestyle (Tr. 43). He also 
testified he is very afraid of going back to his old lifestyle (Tr. 46). Applicant completed 
the required counseling in January 2006. The prognosis from the CRADC was 
favorable, but it was contingent on Applicant following his aftercare plan, which included 
participation in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) (AX B-1 at 3).  
 
Applicant began his aftercare treatment and began participating in AA in August 
2009, more than three years after completing the counseling. He described the 
aftercare program as a “four hour ordeal” each week. He qualified this description by 
explaining that the meetings lasted for an hour and a half but that it took an hour to drive 
each way to and from the meeting (Tr. 69-70). He completed the aftercare program 
about three weeks before the hearing (Tr. 44). When asked why he waited so long to 
initiate his aftercare plan, he testified he was focused on remodeling his house and 
trying to sell it (Tr. 66-67).  
 
 During an interview with a security investigator in May 2007, he stated he had 
reduced his alcohol consumption to less than six beers a month and that he was no 
longer drinking to intoxication (GX 2 at 6). In August 2008, he responded to DOHA 
interrogatories, stating that he last consumed alcohol when he drank one beer with 
dinner on his birthday in August 2007 (GX 3 at 3). In response to the same 
interrogatories, Applicant submitted an evaluation from a licensed clinical social worker, 
who opined that he did not have an alcohol-related problem when he was evaluated on 
August 8, 2008 (GX 3 at 9; AX B-2). 
 
 As of mid-October 2009, Applicant had been attending AA meetings once a week 
for three months (AX B-6). He has an AA sponsor. He informed the CRADC that he 
intended to join an additional AA group and attend its meetings once a week (AX B-3). 
The CRADC believed he was motivated to change his lifestyle and avoid future alcohol-
related problems. On October 19, 2009, the CRADC changed his diagnosis from 
alcohol dependence to alcohol abuse (AX B-4 at 5-6).   
 
 Applicant testified that all his alcohol-related driving offenses occurred while 
bowling in a highly competitive league. Since his DUI conviction in 2005, he has given 
up competitive bowling, and he has surrounded himself with a different group of friends 
(Tr. 42). At the hearing, he submitted an affidavit stating that he has not consumed any 
alcohol since August 2007, that he will not consume any alcohol in the future, that he is 
willing to submit to any testing or evaluation deemed appropriate, and that if he is 
                                                          
2  This acronym does not incorporate the entire description of his credentials, but it is the official acronym 
on his professional license. 
 
5 
 
 
allowed to keep his security clearance, he agrees that any future alcohol-related 
incident will cause his clearance to be revoked without any challenge from him (AX B-
7). 
 
 Applicant submitted a previous security clearance application in July 1999, in 
which he disclosed the OWI arrest in May 1999 (AX D at 5). When he submitted his 
security clearance application in June 2006, he disclosed the alcohol-related arrests in 
2003, 2004, and 2005, but he did not disclose the 1999 OWI arrest. He told a security 
investigator his failure to disclose the 1999 arrest was intentional (GX 2 at 4). He 
testified he was going through major stresses at the time his submitted his 1999 
application, and he was afraid of losing his job if he disclosed the 1999 OWI arrest (Tr. 
49). 
 
 Applicant also did not disclose the 1999 arrest to the CRADC who treated him in 
2005 (AX B-1). He testified he did not recall why he failed to disclose it to the CRADC 
(Tr. 64-65). 
 
 Applicant’s companion describes him as a “great man” who takes great pride in 
his work (AX C-1). His companion’s brother has never suspected that Applicant was still 
drinking. He considers Applicant very dedicated and generous (AX C-5). His 
companion’s sister-in-law also describes him as warm, caring, and conscientious (AX C-
6). Two social friends who have known Applicant for three years consider him to be 
honest, reliable, hard working, conscientious, and courteous (AX C-2; AX C-7). Two 
colleagues describe him as knowledgeable, dedicated, and caring (AX C-3; AX C-8). 
Applicant’s current supervisor regards him as very personable, diligent, honest, reliable, 
and stable (AX C-4). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication, from at least May 1999 to at least August 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It 
alleges he was charged with OWI in May 1999, received alcohol counseling in May 
1999, and was diagnosed with alcohol abuse (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.c). It alleges that he was 
charged with DWI in April 2003, pleaded guilty to a lesser offense, and received alcohol 
counseling in June and July 2003, and was diagnosed with alcohol dependence (SOR 
¶¶ 1,d-1.e). It alleges that he was charged with DWI in March 2004, pleaded guilty to a 
lesser offense, and completed two days of alcohol counseling in June 2004 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.f-1.g). It alleges that he was arrested for DUI in July 2005, pleaded guilty to DUI, 
 
7 
 
 
received court-ordered alcohol counseling from September 2005 to January 2006, and 
was diagnosed with alcohol dependence (SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.i). Finally, it alleges that 
Applicant continued to consume alcohol after completing the court-ordered counseling 
in January 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.j). Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.j. He denied SOR ¶ 1.a, 
but I conclude it is supported by his arrest record and his admission at the hearing that 
he consumed alcohol in August 2007. 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21 as follows: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The following potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence. . . , regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
AG ¶ 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program; and  
AG ¶ 22(f): relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 All four disqualifying conditions are raised by the evidence. Although the 
evidence reflects that Applicant consumed only a single beer after completing his 
alcohol rehabilitation program in January 2007, the single drink is sufficient to constitute 
a “relapse” within the meaning of AG ¶ 22(f).  
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(a), (c), (e), and (f), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). The first prong of this 
mitigating condition focuses on whether the conduct was recent. There are no Abright 
line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based 
on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 
 
8 
 
 
(App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant’s last instance of excessive drinking was in July 2005, more than four 
years ago. He consumed one beer in August 2007, and he has abstained from alcohol 
since then. He has found new friends, responded favorably to the court-ordered 
counseling he completed in January 2006, and found a new romantic relationship. He 
has changed jobs and earned the respect of his current supervisor. Applicant’s belated 
completion of the aftercare program and participation in AA appear to have been 
motivated in large part by his pending hearing and the realization that his security 
clearance was at risk. Nevertheless, he appears to have changed his lifestyle and is 
determined to remain abstinent from alcohol. I conclude AG ¶ 23(a) is established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). For the reasons set 
out above concerning AG ¶ 23(a), I conclude AG ¶ 23(b) is established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated under AG ¶ 
23(d) if — 
 
[T]he individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
For the reasons set out above, I conclude that this mitigating condition also is 
established. Although the favorable prognosis in this case was provided by a CRADC 
rather than a medical doctor or licensed clinical social worker, his certification, license to 
practice, and educational qualifications are sufficiently similar to those of a licensed 
clinical social worker to warrant application of this mitigating condition. 
 
 Applicant’s statement of intent, willingness to undergo testing, and agreement 
that any alcohol-related incidents will result in revocation of his clearance does not fall 
under any of the enumerated mitigating conditions under this Guideline. Nevertheless, it 
is patterned on the statement of intent specifically enumerated in AG ¶ 26(b)(4) under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and it is relevant in determining the strength and 
sincerity of Applicant’s intent to abstain from using alcohol.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges Applicant falsified material facts on his security clearance 
application by intentionally failing to disclose his OWI arrest in March 1999 (SOR ¶ 2.a). 
He admitted this allegation in his response to the SOR and at the hearing. The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire.” AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant admitted the intentional falsification in his answer 
to the SOR and at the hearing, thereby raising AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted 
with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant submitted his security clearance in June 2006, but 
he made no effort to correct the intentional omission until he was interviewed by a 
security investigator in May 2007. Even during this interview, he did not disclose the 
May 1999 arrest until he was specifically asked if he had been arrested in the town 
where the arrest occurred. He then admitted being arrested for OWI in May 1999. 
 
 Security concerns arising from personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense 
is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application was not minor. It was 
intended to undermine the integrity of the security clearance process. It was a repeat of 
his deception during the court-ordered counseling in 2005. He initially repeated the 
deception during a security interview in May 2007, but he finally told the truth after 
further questioning. At the hearing he recanted his September 1999 affidavit, in which 
he admitted a history of alcohol abuse beginning in 1976. His recantation means that 
either his affidavit or his hearing testimony was false. In light of this track record, I am 
not satisfied that further attempts to deceive will not recur. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns arising from personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
 
10 
 
 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). For the reasons set out above in my 
discussion of AG ¶ 17(c), I conclude this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). Applicant receives some credit under this 
mitigating condition because he has finally disclosed the full extent of his alcohol abuse 
to his companion, friends, colleagues, and his supervisor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who is technically proficient and very devoted to his 
work. He has held a clearance for many years. He appears to have changed his lifestyle 
after completing the court-ordered counseling, and alcohol abuse is no longer part of his 
life. However, he has not overcome his tendency to minimize or conceal his past. He 
deceived the CRADC, falsified his security clearance application, tried to deceive a 
security investigator, and admitted the 1999 OWI arrest only after the investigator 
indicated he already knew about it. He recanted his September 1999 affidavit at the 
hearing. Considering these events and all the evidence together, I have doubts about 
his reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The SOR does not allege Applicant’s concealment of his May 1999 arrest from 
the CRADC or his initial attempt to deceive the security investigator in May 2007. I have 
considered this conduct for the limited purpose of deciding which adjudicative guidelines 
 
11 
 
 
are applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether Applicant has demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; and as part of my whole-person analysis. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines G and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption, but he 
has not mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
