 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 08-09697  
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline 
for drug involvement. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing   
(e-QIP) on August 14, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2 
                                                
On August 21, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant signed his notarized Answer on October 7, 2009. He admitted both 
allegations under Guideline H and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 6, 2009, and the case was 
assigned to me on November 16, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 
11, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 6, 2010. Government 
counsel offered two exhibits, which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented the testimony of two witnesses. He 
also offered five exhibits. I marked and admitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D. 
Department Counsel objected to parts of AE E. I admitted AE E, reserving my decision 
on its weight. DOHA received the transcript on January 13, 2009. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Applicant’s Exhibit E is a report from a private polygrapher that contained the 
following: the polygrapher’s description of Applicant's pre-polygraph interview, listing his 
questions to Applicant and Applicant's responses (pages 1 and 2); the polygrapher’s 
opinion as to Applicant's truthfulness (page 2); results of Applicant's polygraph (page 3); 
Applicant's identifying information (page 4); polygrapher’s license (page 5); 
polygrapher’s curriculum vitae (pages 6 - 13); and the polygrapher’s identification card 
(page 14).  
 
Department Counsel objected to the portion of page 2 that contains the 
polygrapher’s opinion as to Applicant's truthfulness; and to page 3, the technical results 
of the polygraph. The Appeal Board has held that an applicant’s statements made 
during the course of a polygraph examination are admissible, while polygraph results 
and the polygrapher’s opinion of a subject’s veracity are not admissible.3 Accordingly, I 
assign no weight to that portion of page 2 containing the polygrapher’s opinion of 
Applicant's truthfulness, and no weight to the polygraph results on page 3. As to the 
remainder of the exhibit, I found that the admissible portions did not substantively 
contribute to the case, and accorded them little weight. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
3 See ISCR Case No. 02-31428 (App. Bd. Jan 20, 2006) at 3. 
 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the 
Statement of Reasons, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant, who is 32 years old, earned a bachelor’s degree in management 
science and information technology in 1999. He has worked as a web consultant since 
2002. He has been employed by the same defense contractor in that position since 
2007. Applicant is single and has no children. This is his first application for a security 
clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 49-50) 
 
Applicant stated in his Answer that he used ecstasy at a friend’s house between 
2000 and 2002. In his Answer and at the hearing, he stated that it occurred “in what I 
believe was 1999.” He adjusted the date because he realized he used it during 
vacation, before he graduated college in December 1999. This was the only time he 
used Ecstasy. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 78-79) 
 
In his security clearance application, Applicant listed five uses of marijuana 
between 1999 and 2008. In his Answer and at the hearing, he clarified that he was 
exposed to marijuana five times, but only smoked it himself on three of those occasions. 
In 1999 and in the spring of 2001, Applicant was exposed to marijuana when he was 
driving with friends. He stated that he did not use marijuana himself on either of these 
occasions, and no longer associates with these friends. In the summer of 2001, while at 
a beach party, Applicant accepted an offer to “take a drag from the bong.” He stated in 
his Answer that, “This was actually the first time I ever inhaled.” In 2002, while on a 
cruise, he shared a marijuana cigarette that was passed among his friends. He did not 
know the man who offered him the cigarette, and he has not seen him since then. His 
last use of marijuana occurred in July 2008. Applicant was at a friend’s house preparing 
to leave for a kickball game. He was offered a joint and accepted it, taking one “drag.” 
He has not seen this friend since the winter of 2008. (AE A; Tr. 49-58)  
 
Applicant denies purchasing or selling either marijuana or ecstasy. He used 
marijuana in response to peer pressure. His employer and his parents are aware of his 
drug use. Applicant has not participated in drug counseling or a drug treatment 
program, but was evaluated by a drug counselor in November 2009. He took three drug 
tests, administered by prospective employers, all of which were negative. He no longer 
associates with any of the friends with whom he used drugs. Applicant has had no 
involvement with law enforcement related to illegal drug use. He disclosed his drug use 
on his security clearance application, during his security interview, and in his 
interrogatory responses. He admits that he made bad decisions when he decided to use 
illegal drugs. He has no intent to use illegal drugs in the future. He submitted a signed 
statement declaring this intent, aware that future use could result in revocation of any 
security clearance that he is granted. (GE 1, 2; AE A, D; Tr. 28-47, 62-63, 87-88) 
 
 
 
4 
                                                
 Applicant's current supervisor testified on Applicant's behalf. He has supervised 
Applicant since April 2009. Applicant informed him of his drug use in approximately 
August 2009. He has never seen Applicant under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
Applicant's performs well at his job. His supervisor finds him reliable and trustworthy, 
and recommends him for a security clearance. (Tr. 19-25) 
 
 In November 2009, Applicant contacted a drug counselor to obtain an evaluation. 
At the hearing, the counselor offered his professional opinion of Applicant's current drug 
status.4 The witness holds a master’s degree in counseling, and has been a state-
licensed professional counselor since 1997. He is a nationally certified master addiction 
counselor, and is certified by the U.S. Department of Transportation as a substance 
abuse professional. He has been in practice 12 years. He is also the director of an 
outpatient mental health and substance abuse practice. He conducted an in-depth 
interview of Applicant, a urinalysis, and substance-abuse testing. He found that 
Applicant’s illegal drug use stemmed from curiosity and peer pressure. Applicant's 
conduct does not meet the definition of either drug abuse or dependence, as defined by 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM). Based on his evaluation, he concluded 
that there is “a very low probability of [Applicant] using again” in the future. (Tr. 28-47) 
 
 Applicant's project manager, who has known Applicant for two years, submitted a 
notarized affidavit in which he stated that Applicant has never shown any indication of 
illegal drug use. Applicant informed him of his drug use when they both submitted 
security clearance applications in 2008. The affiant noted that Applicant has been 
discrete in his handling of sensitive information. He believes Applicant to be honest and 
trustworthy. Applicant's former project manager, who has also known Applicant for two 
years, submitted a notarized affidavit stating that Applicant informed him in 2008 of his 
illegal drug use. As the witness holds a security clearance, he is aware of the 
responsibility to report risks posed by others. He believes Applicant to be honest and 
trustworthy, and has never seen him engage in questionable behavior. (AE B, C).  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised AG.5 
Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
 
4 Department Counsel had no objection to the witness’s qualifications to provide an expert opinion. (Tr. 
40) 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
5 
                                                
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Of the eight disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 25, the following are relevant:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant did not purchase illegal drugs, but admits illegally using marijuana and 
Ecstasy. He used Ecstasy once, and marijuana between 3 and 5 times from 1999 to 
2008. Applicant’s illegal drug use demonstrated poor judgment and willingness to 
break the law. Both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 26 includes three mitigating conditions that warrant consideration in 
relation to these facts:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
 
 Applicant used ecstasy one time in approximately 1999. I consider this use 
distant in time and experimental. He used marijuana three to five times in nine years, 
between the years of 1999 and 2008. I find this use to be infrequent. Applicant credibly 
testified that he ended his marijuana use in July 2008, one-and-one-half years ago. 
Since 2007, he has been working steadily at a full-time, professional position. 
According to his supervisor, he is performing responsibly, and is trustworthy and 
dependable. These facts support a finding of current trustworthiness and reliability. 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a) applies. 
 
 
 
7 
 Mitigation is also available under AG ¶ 26(b) (1), (3) and (4). Applicant no longer 
associates with the friends with whom he used drugs. He has abstained from illegal 
drugs for approximately one-and-one-half years. This is not an extensive period of 
abstinence, but in light of the other favorable factors, it is an additional positive 
indication of his commitment to avoid illegal drugs. The drug tests administered by 
three prospective employers were negative. In addition, Applicant submitted a 
statement that he will not use illegal drugs in the future, with the understanding that any 
use would jeopardize his security clearance. AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
 Partial mitigation is available under AG ¶ 26(d). This mitigating condition 
involves completion of a drug treatment program, which does not apply to Applicant. 
However, it warrants discussion because Applicant did undergo an evaluation by a 
qualified medical professional. In the expert opinion of the drug counselor, Applicant 
does not meet the DSM criteria for drug abuse or drug dependence, and has a very 
low probability of using illegal drugs in the future. I consider his testimony to be a 
favorable prognosis. Mitigating condition 26(d) applies in part.  
 
Whole Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guideline and the whole person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under the guideline in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant used Ecstasy once between eight and ten years ago. He used 
marijuana three to five times. Most of the marijuana use occurred between 1999 and 
2002, with a single use in 2008. Most of his illegal drug use is distant in time. Although 
his 2008 use is more recent; and does not represent an extensive period of abstinence, 
I evaluate it in conjunction with his other conduct: his dissociation from his drug-using 
associates, his supervisor and co-workers’ opinions of his trustworthiness, his intent to 
 
 
8 
avoid future use, and the expert’s opinion of a very low likelihood of recurrence. 
Applicant demonstrated maturity by realizing that he made poor decisions when he 
used illegal drugs, and by fully disclosing his drug use during the security clearance 
process. He now holds a responsible, full-time job where he has performed dependably 
for more than two years. His conduct reflects positively on his current trustworthiness.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. for all these reasons, I conclude applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the drug involvement guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.b.:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
