                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08631 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 16, 2008, Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On June 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior), E (Personal Conduct), M (Use of 
Information Technology Systems), and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 30, 2009. He answered the 
SOR in writing on July 7, 2009, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
DOHA received the request on July 13, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on July 21, 2009, and I received the case assignment on August 27, 2009. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 29, 2009, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 18, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 8, which 
were received without objection, except for Exhibit 4. I considered the objection and 
overruled it, admitting the exhibit into evidence. Applicant testified. He submitted 
Exhibits A and B, which were admitted without objection. (Tr. 53, 54) DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 1, 2009. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding to ¶ 1.b, after “images 
of” the words, “nude and/or sexually explicit.” Applicant objected on the basis the 
government originally could have written the allegation that way but failed to do so. I 
overruled the objection and allowed the amendment because it was a clarifying 
amendment within the context of the existing allegations. (Tr. 8-11)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 7, 2009, Applicant denied the factual 
allegations in all paragraphs of the SOR. He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 39 years old, married for 14 years, and has three children. He works 
for a defense contractor. He started that job in November 2007. He currently has a 
security clearance and has had a clearance since 2001. (Tr. 55-58; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant worked for another defense contractor from November 2005 until 
October 25, 2007, a Thursday. On that day, the employer terminated Applicant for 
cause. He is not eligible for rehiring by the company. The reason for termination was the 
use of his employer’s computer to access child pornography websites on the internet 
during work hours. The employer installed software on its computers on October 19, 
2007, to track any employee’s access to the internet. Applicant was identified as one of 
those employees accessing pornographic websites during work hours. The company 
software discovered Applicant went to the child pornography website 14 times between 
0920 and 0924 on October 22, 2007, using the company computer, and downloaded 
onto his company computer numerous pictures of nude and/or sexually explicit young 
pre-teen and teenage boys. (Tr. 24-39, 57, Exhibit 2 to 6) 
 
The company shipped the hard drive from Applicant’s computer to their 
headquarters for examination by the local police forensic unit. The police department 
discovered child pornographic images on Applicant’s hard drive. The police department 
also discovered that Applicant had installed Lime Wire on his hard drive. He made this 
installation without authority or permission from his employer. This software is used to 
 
3 
 
 
share downloaded images, including those of child pornography. The police sent the 
recovered child pornographic images to the National Center for Missing and Exploited 
Children (NCMEC) for identification purposes. The NCMEC identified 22 images as 
known child pornographic images. The police department report is dated November 29, 
2007. (Tr. 24-39; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
A company vice-president testified that he was Applicant’s supervisor. The vice-
president has worked in government contracting for 44 years and has had a security 
clearance for many of those years. Applicant used a company computer at work. The 
company had a policy against excessive internet use of the computer not related to 
company work. The company had problems with employees engaging in such usage for 
considerable periods of time. After the installation of computer monitoring software on 
Friday October 19, 2007, the company identified six employees at the vice-president’s 
work location who were using the internet excessively. One of those persons identified 
was Applicant, who worked in the vice-president’s division, as the security officer and 
safety officer. All six persons were terminated. The vice-president obtained information 
from the computer staff about Applicant’s internet use during the work day. He was 
informed that Applicant was looking at child pornography sites and was sometimes 
spending up to six hours a day on the internet. The vice-president told Applicant that he 
was terminated and had to depart the building immediately with his personal items or 
return the following day to get his property while being escorted in the building. He 
made it clear to Applicant that he was fired from the job and for what reason.  
Applicant’s company badge was taken from him at that time. Applicant was not eligible 
for rehiring. He did not tell Applicant he was “laid off.” Later that day, Applicant’s 
computer was dismantled and the hard drive was sent to the company headquarters. 
The vice-president described Applicant as an average employee and somewhat 
dedicated to his work. (Tr. 24-39, 43, 45, 46, 63, 71, 72; Exhibits 6-8) 
 
Applicant applied for unemployment compensation and obtained it after his 
termination. He was paid for one month. Under the applicable state law, a former 
employer may contest the awarding of unemployment compensation. This employer, 
according to the vice-president, usually does not oppose the unemployment 
compensation and did not do so in this case. (Tr. 38-40, 76, 77, 80; Exhibit 7) 
 
Applicant denied he downloaded the pornographic pictures onto his office 
computer. He claimed it was a hand-me-down computer which the company placed in 
his office. He used a laptop computer for other business purposes. Applicant testified 
that his office computer was used by new applicants for company jobs to complete their 
security applications. The job applicants would do research on the computer to be able 
to complete the applications. He did not monitor their activities, but only answered their 
questions. He does not know how the pornographic pictures appeared on his company 
computer. (Tr. 59-66)  
 
Applicant denies installing computer software named “Lime wire” on his company 
computer. He claims his computer was a “hand-me-down” computer and he was the 
 
4 
 
 
third user. Applicant denies all wrongdoing regarding his computer and internet access 
as alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 78-98, 101-104)  
 
Applicant completed his e-QIP on January 16, 2008. He answered Question 22 
regarding being fired from a job in the past seven years, quitting a job after being told he 
would be fired, departed a job following allegations of misconduct, or by mutual 
agreement after allegations of unsatisfactory performance, or for any other reason 
under unfavorable circumstances with a negative reply. Applicant did not disclose the 
October 25, 2007, termination from his former employer. He considered himself 
“released” not terminated. Applicant testified that he did not learn of the reasons for his 
termination until 2008. (Tr. 66-75, 94; Exhibit 8)  
 
Applicant submitted three character statements as part of his Answer. He also 
submitted his checking account statement from November 2007 showing the 
unemployment compensation deposits. The character statements present Applicant as 
responsible and well-organized, an excellent security officer, and helpful in organizing 
an open house in 2008 at his work place. (Tr. 98, 99; Answer) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern under this guideline: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. All of them are applicable here: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Applicant spent up to six hours daily looking at pornographic websites on his 
company’s computer between October 22 and 25, 2007. This action was contrary to 
company policy. The government’s exhibits and the testimony of the company official 
are very credible on this issue. Viewing child pornography and downloading it to a 
computer is contrary to law and policy. AG ¶ 13 (a) applies. 
 
 The frequency of Applicant’s actions shows a pattern of compulsive and self-
destructive sexual behavior. He was not able to stop his actions. AG ¶ 13 (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior makes him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress, if 
known to the public. Applicant does not want to be known as a husband and father who 
views child pornography at work sites. AG ¶ 13 (c) applies. Applicant’s actions show a 
lack of discretion or judgment. AG ¶ 13 (d) applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None of these 
mitigating conditions apply on the facts presented by Applicant: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and,  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
  
 Applicant’s general denials of any misconduct and inappropriate use of the 
company computer is not credible or persuasive. He offers no concrete evidence that 
any of these mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying.  One condition applies because of the allegation of failure to answer 
the question truthfully on the e-QIP pertaining to his job loss in the past seven years: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant did not disclose in answering Question 22 of the e-QIP that he had 
been terminated on October 25, 2007, by his employer. This condition applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 Under the evidence Applicant introduced at the hearing none of the mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant denies he was terminated, only “released” from work by his 
employer. He also contends his receipt of unemployment compensation after his 
termination is determinative of the issue that he was not terminated. The testimony of 
the company vice-president was conclusive on this aspect of the event. The company 
for which Applicant worked does not usually contest unemployment compensation 
claims. Applicant only received compensation for one month before he obtained another 
job.   
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes eight conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Four conditions apply in this case: 
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; 
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information 
technology system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
 Applicant used his company’s computer to illegally access child pornography 
websites, and other sexually explicit material, during work hours in violation of company 
policy. He installed “Lime ware” file sharing software on his computer’s hard drive 
without authority from his company. Each of these four disqualifying conditions applies 
because of the modifications Applicant made without authority to his company’s 
computer that was assigned to him, as well as his subsequent actions on the computer.   
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
  
  None of these mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s situation. His behavior is 
recent, deliberate, not minor, and done for his own gratification and benefit. Applicant 
made no effort to correct the situation. His general and repeated denials are not 
persuasive. There is no counseling or rehabilitation shown, hence no evidence that 
similar conduct is unlikely to recur. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes five conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two conditions apply: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant illegally viewed pornographic websites and downloaded numerous 
images of nude and/or sexually explicit photographs of young pre-teen and teenage 
boys onto his company computer during work days. Such viewing and downloading 
over four days in October 2007 are repeated criminal actions. Applicant was never 
indicted or tried in criminal court for his alleged actions. But he did not have to be 
convicted of the allegations for the disqualifying condition to apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 None of them apply. The time since Applicant used his company computer to 
access the sex sites is comparatively recent. Applicant was not pressured into looking 
at these sites. He did commit the actions. Applicant denies any of the access activities, 
so there is no rehabilitation if the Applicant does not acknowledge the misbehavior.  
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult, husband, 
and father when he accessed pornographic sites from his office computer. He denies 
anything wrong ever occurred, or that he was terminated for misconduct by his 
employer in October 2007. He accessed the sites daily. There is no evidence Applicant 
showed that he underwent any rehabilitation for viewing child pornography because he 
denies he ever accessed the pornography. His denials are not credible when compared 
to the detailed documents and testimony presented documenting his misconduct.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his sexual 
behavior, personal conduct, information technology systems use, and criminal conduct. 
I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
