                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09776 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Remand Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 11, 2009, the Appeal Board remanded Applicant’s case 
requesting clarification of whether Applicant possessed a need for access to classified 
information before the commencement of the hearing. I find Applicant did possess a 
need for access to classified information before the commencement of his hearing. 
Even though Applicant was not working in a particular contract or being paid by his 
employer, Applicant was still being sponsored for a clearance by his employer who 
intended to rehire him.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 14, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
1992, as revised.1 The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or 
revoked. 
 
On February 5, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
February 26, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 24, 2009. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled on April 14, 2009. The government offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 23). Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection (Tr. 23). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on April 22, 2009. I issued a decision denying eligibility for access to classified 
information on July 13, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant appealed the decision to deny his clearance. On September 11, 2009, 
the Appeal Board, without addressing Applicant’s appeal issues, sua sponte remanded 
Applicant’s case because of a possible jurisdictional issue.2 The Appeal Board 
remanded Applicant’s case for clarification of the following: 
 
1. How was the document entitled a “Person Summary,” obtained from the Joint 
Personnel Adjudications System (JPAS) – now identified as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) 
1 -- entered into the record;3  
 
2. Whether Applicant had lost his job before the commencement of the hearing; 
and,  
 
3. Whether DOHA had lost subject matter jurisdiction to adjudicate Applicant’s 
security clearance under Directive ¶ 4.4.  
 
The Appeal Board stated: 
 
 
1  On August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) directed application of 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987, as amended.  
 
2  ISCR Case No. 08-09776 (App. Bd. Sept. 11, 2009, Remand Decision). 
 
3  In its pertinent parts, App. Ex. 1 stated “Separation Status: Separation” and “Separation Date: 
2009 03 09.” 
 
3 
 
 
Although the Board is authorized to resolve jurisdictional questions, due to 
the ambiguities presented by the record, the appropriate course is to 
remand the case to the Judge for additional proceedings. Therefore, we 
remand the case to the Judge to reopen the record to allow the parties to 
present evidence as to the facts and circumstances regarding the 
jurisdictional issue outlined above, including the question of whether 
Applicant still possessed a need for access to classified information by the 
time of the hearing. Other issues raised by Applicant on appeal are not 
ripe for adjudication. 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-09776 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009). 
 
 On October 8, 2009, I conducted a hearing to allow the parties to present 
evidence concerning the issues raised by the Appeal Board. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel and Applicant denied presenting App. Ex. 1 during the April 2009 hearing. 
Because of the DOHA transmittal letter attached to the JPAS Person Summary (App. 
Ex 1), I assume the document was placed into the record by administrative personnel 
from the Hearing Office, along with other routine documents such as the hearing notice 
and correspondence explaining the Applicant’s procedural rights. 
 
 At the October 2009 hearing, Department Counsel presented, without objection, 
three documents that were marked as App. Ex. 2 through 4. App. Ex. 2 is a letter, dated 
April 13, 2009, sent by Applicant’s employer’s facility security officer (FSO) to 
Department Counsel requesting that she continue with Applicant’s security clearance 
hearing scheduled for April 14, 2009. The FSO stated in her email: “I will maintain 
[Applicant’s] record in JPAS until a decision has been made about his jurisdiction. He 
lost his job when the loss of jurisdiction happened.”  
 
 Department Counsel explained that three or four days before Applicant’s hearing 
(scheduled for April 14, 2009), she looked into JPAS to ensure DOHA had jurisdiction 
over Applicant’s case. She noted a JPAS entry indicating Applicant had been separated 
as of March 9, 2009 (App. Ex. 1). Department Counsel telephonically contacted 
Applicant’s FSO for a clarification of Applicant’s employment situation. She was 
informed that Applicant’s company was still sponsoring Applicant for a security 
clearance. Department Counsel was further informed that the company wanted 
Applicant’s hearing to take place as scheduled, and that the company intended to retain 
or rehire Applicant if he received his clearance (2nd Tr. 10-14). The FSO forwarded App. 
Ex. 2 to Department Counsel to memorialize their conversation. 
 
 As a result of Department Counsel’s conversation with the FSO, the FSO made 
corrections in Applicant’s JPAS Person Summary indicating in its pertinent parts: 
“Separation Status: N/A” and “Separation Date: N/A” (App. Ex. 3 (The document was 
printed on April 14, 2009).  
 
Applicant was terminated from his contractor job in January 2009, when his 
employer’s contract ended. A second government contractor picked up the contract and 
 
4 
 
 
intended to hire Applicant to continue working in other government contracts. Because 
of the security concerns raised by the SOR, the second contractor declined to hire 
Applicant. The initial government contractor/employer continued sponsoring Applicant’s 
security clearance and intended to rehire Applicant if he received a favorable security 
clearance adjudication (App. Ex. 2 and 3). Applicant was unemployed from January 
2009 to his hearing day because of the termination of his employer’s contract and the 
security concerns raised by his current financial situation (Tr. 97).  
 
App. Ex. 4 is a JPAS Person Summary for Applicant, with a printed date of 
September 18, 2009, indicating in its pertinent parts: “Separation Date: 2009 07 14” and 
“Separation Status: Separation.” My initial decision denying Applicant’s security 
clearance was published July 13, 2009. The transcript for the second hearing (2nd Tr.) 
was received on October 16, 2009.  
 
Conclusion 
 
 Directive ¶ 4.4 provides, that “actions pursuant to [the] Directive shall cease upon 
termination of the applicant’s need for access to classified information” except in those 
cases in which a hearing has commenced, a clearance decision has been issued, or an 
applicant’s clearance has been suspended and the applicant requested that the case be 
continued.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I am convinced that Applicant was not 
“separated” and he was still being sponsored for a clearance by his employer, even 
though he was not working on a particular contract or being paid. Based on the App. Ex. 
2 and 3, and Department Counsel’s and Applicant's representations, I am satisfied that 
Applicant still had a need for access to classified information. Thus, pursuant to 
Directive ¶ 4.4, DOHA had jurisdiction when the hearing commenced and as of the date 
of the initial decision. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
