KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: According to the Directive, the DOHA security clearance process is not normally
terminated once a hearing has commenced.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 08-09362.a1
DATE: 02/19/2010
DATE: February 19, 2010
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-09362
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 24, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
2
requested a hearing.  On November 12, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Martin H.
Mogul denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge considered all the
record evidence; and (2) whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge found that Applicant has experienced financial difficulties as evidenced by
numerous outstanding and overdue consumer credit card and medical debts.  Applicant testified that
the majority of her debts are the result of medical bills that her family has accrued over the years,
including a medical condition of her husband that left him unemployed for a time.  Notwithstanding
Applicant’s assertions, the Judge found that the majority of the debts listed on the SOR were for
credit card debt rather than medical bills.  Additionally, the Judge found that Applicant does not
attribute most of her financial difficulties to the fact of her husband’s unemployment.  The Judge
concluded that there was little evidence introduced to establish that Applicant has resolved most of
the overdue debts, and a great deal of her debt is from overuse of credit cards.  Because of this and
Applicant’s lack of a stable economic outlook, the Judge resolved Guideline F against her. 
Applicant argues that she provided evidence that she had made payments toward her debt and
that she and her husband were engaged in financial counseling, and this evidence was ignored and
not taken into consideration.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge has considered all the
record evidence unless he or she indicates otherwise.  That presumption is not overcome here.  A
review of the evidence, including a post-hearing submission proffered by Applicant, reveals that the
Judge specifically references Applicant’s efforts at debt repayment and her attempts to obtain debt
counseling.    
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a
whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 12, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He discussed the applicability of Guideline F mitigating conditions and
cogently explained why there was insufficient mitigation to overcome the government’s security
concerns, stressing the facts that Applicant’s debts are largely unresolved and her current financial
profile does not suggest that she is in a position to meaningfully resolve her overdue indebtedness.
Government Exhibit 1.  In her brief, Applicant states that she is a DoD civilian employee and was formerly a1
government contractor.
3
Applicant states that her current job requires only a confidential clearance and does not
understand why she was processed for a secret clearance.  The level of clearance currently held, or
the level of clearance applied for do not affect the Judge’s analysis or the Board’s review.  Directive
¶ 3.2 makes no distinction concerning basic clearance levels in its procedures for deciding whether
access to classified information is clearly in the national interest.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at
3 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007).    
Applicant states that her case should have been seen under different circumstances due to her
federal contractor employment status.  Applicant fails to state with sufficient specificity how the fact
of her employment status established error in the Judge’s analysis.  To the extent that Applicant may
be raising a jurisdictional issue, it is not dispositive in this case.  There is no record evidence that
suggests that Applicant was anything other than a contractor employee at the commencement of the
security clearance application process or that her status changed prior to the hearing.   According to1
the Directive, ¶ 4.4, the DOHA security clearance adjudication process is not normally terminated
once a hearing has commenced.  
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan     
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
4
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
