 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09045 
 SSN: ) 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations concerns but has not mitigated 
Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F and E, Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
September 28, 2009, and reassigned to me on September 30, 2009. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on November 9, 2009, and the hearing was convened as scheduled 
on December 9, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. GE 1, 2, and 
4 through 7 were received without objection. GE 3 was admitted for a limited purpose 
over Applicant’s objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. 
He did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on December 23, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
On my own motion, I amended the SOR by adding an allegation under Guideline 
E, as follows: 
 
2.c. You intentionally provided false testimony at your hearing on 
December 9, 2009, when you testified that your wife has not worked since 
1999. 
 
Department Counsel did not object to the amendment. Applicant’s objection was 
overruled. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
retain his security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since 1997. He is 
a high school graduate. He is married with two children, ages 20 and 17.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts, with balances totaling in excess of 
$79,000. Applicant denied all the debts alleged in the SOR, with explanations. All of the 
debts are listed on one or both of the credit reports obtained in April 2008 and January 
2009, with the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1,c, and 1.l. Those debts 
are not listed on any credit report in evidence. Those allegations were apparently based 
upon Applicant’s response to interrogatories. The $10,115 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is 
listed on Applicant’s bankruptcy petition, as discussed below. The $6,919 debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c is to the same credit card company as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. It is not 
specifically listed on Applicant’s bankruptcy petition. The $209 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l 
is to the same bank as the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, which has a $6,608 balance.2   
 
 Applicant and his wife filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2009. Schedule F listed 
25 unsecured debts, with claims totaling $108,325. There were 15 medical claims 
totaling $37,451, including one claim for $25,905. The remaining unsecured debts were 
to banks, credit cards, and collection companies for revolving credit purchases. The 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 36-37, 42; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4, 7. 
 
 
3 
 
only secured claim was the $45,600 mortgage on Applicant’s home. The petition listed 
four vehicles, two were 1998 models, one was a 2001 model, and one was a 2002 
model. All the vehicles are high mileage and are owned outright. The 2001 vehicle had 
250,000 miles, and the 2002 vehicle had 183,000 miles. The petition also listed a 2003 
all-terrain vehicle (ATV), four horses, eight dogs, and four cats. The ATV was valued at 
$1,500, and the animals were also valued at $1,500. Applicant’s debts were discharged 
on August 31, 2009.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s back injury in 1999. 
Except for about a 15-month period in 2007 to 2009, she has been out of work since the 
injury. She had six back operations and multiple medical procedures, resulting in large 
medical bills. She handled the family finances. She used credit cards to pay her medical 
bills, but was unable to pay everything. She is receiving Social Security disability. She 
worked on a ranch from about November 2007 to February 2009. She worked nights 
watching the horses. She would drive around the ranch, check on the horses, and water 
and feed them. She worked full-time for about six months, and part-time for the 
remaining nine months.4 She testified: 
 
I got us caught up on bills mainly to pay a lot of those bills off like my car 
and different ones that were actually bills, that, you know, they could take - 
- they could take whatever we had away from us, not exactly get caught 
up on the credit card bills but to get caught up on the other bills.5 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling in conjunction with his bankruptcy. His 
wife stated that she is capable of returning to work if it becomes necessary. She stated 
that she does not require additional surgery. Both of their children have moved out of 
the home, which has eliminated some expenses. She still handles the family finances, 
but Applicant keeps himself informed of the status of their finances.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
April 1, 2008. He answered “No” Questions 28a and 28b, which asked “In the last 7 
years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and “Are you currently 
over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 
86. He stated that he did not know all the facts of his credit history because his wife 
handled the finances, and she did not tell him they had delinquent debts. His wife 
testified that he knew that they were struggling, but not to the extent that they were. She 
attempted to fix the problem on her own.7 After considering all the evidence, I find that 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 25-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6. 
 
4 Tr. at 21-25, 52-53, 57, 61; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. at 53. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-41, 53-60. 
 
7 Tr. at 21-23, 32-36, 54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
there is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally falsified his 
SF 86.  
 
 Applicant testified with his wife out of the courtroom, because she might be called 
as a witness. He testified that his wife had not worked since she injured her back in 
1999: 
 
Q: (Department Counsel): Okay, So in ’99 she was injured. How seriously 
was she injured? Did she have to miss work? 
 
 A: Yes, she missed work. 
 
 Q: How long did she miss work? 
 
 A: Oh, crud, for - - well, she hadn’t been to work since. 
 
 Q: She’s never returned to work? 
 
 A: No, sir. 
 
 Q: Okay. 
 
 A: She is permanently disabled. 
 
Q: Okay. Is she - - she’s permanently disabled. Is she collecting social 
security disability? 
 
 A: Yes, sir, at this time she is.8 
 
Applicant’s wife returned to the courtroom after he testified. He did not initially call her 
as a witness. After Department Counsel’s closing statement, she interrupted and stated 
that she did not have a chance to say anything. Applicant then decided to call her as a 
witness, and I permitted her testimony over Department Counsel’s objection. She 
testified about working at the ranch. Applicant testified again and denied intentionally 
providing false testimony. He stated that she was “baby-sitting horses,” and he did not 
consider “driving around looking at horses” to be a job. When asked what he considered 
it, he stated: “A hobby. I don’t like horses, you know.”9 After considering all the 
evidence, I find that Applicant intentionally provided false testimony when he testified 
that his wife had not worked since 1999. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 24. 
 
9 Tr. at 50-64, 67. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
7 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts were discharged in bankruptcy on August 31, 2009. That is too 
recent to find AG ¶ 20(a) applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s wife injured her back in 1999. She had six back surgeries and 
multiple hospital and doctor visits. She did not work again until 2007, and then she only 
worked full-time for six months and part-time for nine months. These qualify as 
conditions that were outside Applicant’s control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant should 
have known that his family’s finances were suffering, but he chose to remain ignorant. I 
do not find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as part of his bankruptcy. His financial 
problems have been resolved through bankruptcy. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. His actions 
do not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.10 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.l are not listed on any credit report in 
evidence. The $10,115 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is listed on Applicant’s bankruptcy 
petition and in his response to interrogatories. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to that debt. 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.l appear either to be duplicates of other alleged 
debts, or they could have been accounts in Applicant’s wife’s name only. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to those debts. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 Applicant submitted inaccurate information on his SF 86, but as discussed 
above, there is insufficient evidence for a determination that it was intentional. AG ¶ 
16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false testimony at his hearing, when he testified 
that his wife had not worked since 1999. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable as a disqualifying 
condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
9 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant denied providing false testimony at his hearing. His denial was not 
credible. I find that no mitigating conditions are applicable to his false testimony.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has resolved his financial problems through bankruptcy, but he provided false 
testimony at his hearing. I have serious doubts about his integrity, judgment, and 
honesty.  
 
 
10 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations concerns but has not mitigated 
Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
