                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-07826
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Randy Walker, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On April 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued
after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 26, 2009, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on July 7, 2009, and was scheduled for hearing on September
15, 2009.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date.  At the hearing, the government's
case consisted of three exhibits; Applicant relied on four witnesses (including himself)
2
and 11 exhibits.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 25, 2009.  Based upon
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access
classified information is granted.
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with documentation of his receipt of chips from Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
commemorating his adherence to sobriety and a follow-up letter from his substance
abuse counselor. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement
the record. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with
documented chips from his AA chapter and an updated letter from his substance abuse
counselor.  His  post-hearing exhibits were admitted as exhibits L and M.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline G, Applicant is alleged to have (a) received alcohol abuse
counseling from an identified alcohol abuse counselor between July and August 2005;
(b) received inpatient treatment for depression and alcohol dependence from an inpatient
hospital between July 2 and 3, 2003; (c) been arrested in August 1991 for driving under
the influence (DUI), and (d) consumed alcohol as recent as August 2008.  
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations covered by
Guideline G.  He added no explanations or affirmative defenses to his answer.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is 46-year old specialty engineer manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. Because Applicant denied every allegation in the SOR, all
relevant and material findings are subject to proof requirements.
Applicant married his first and only spouse in August 1995.  He separated from
his spouse in 1996 and divorced her in September 1997 (see ex. 1).  Applicant has no
children from this marriage  (see ex. 1).  He has two siblings (a brother and sister).
Applicant has a bachelor of science degree in chemistry and is a chemist by
vocation.  He began working for his current employer in November 2005 (see ex. 2; Tr.
67).  
At the age of 21, while still in college, Applicant was introduced to alcohol.  He
started with beer but changed to whiskey after a short time (ex. 2).  By July 2003,
Applicant was regularly consuming 11 ounces of whiskey a day (ex. 2). Aware of
alcoholism in his family (both parents), he struggled to control his drinking.  Concerned
enough about how his drinking could potentially affect his job, he self-referred himself to
an inpatient hospital (IH) in July 2003 (see ex. 2).  
3
Between 1987 and 2003, he was an excessive consumer of alcohol (ex. 2).  He
was arrested and charged with a DUI offense in August 1991.  At the scene, he was
administered a field sobriety test and registered a .08 percent blood alcohol level (BAC).
Typically, he initiated his drinking episodes with beer, but switched to whiskey and then
to gin consumption after a short time (ex. 2).  During this period, he consumed alcohol
three to four times a week.  Over the course of a typical week, he consumed two bottles
(Tr. 81-82).  He often drank to mitigate the effects of his depression problem (see ex. 2).
Concerned about his drinking (mostly by himself) and the potential effects it could
have upon his job (such as missing work), Applicant self-referred himself in July 2003 to
IH’s inpatient unit in a severely intoxicated state (see ex. 2; Tr. 77, 80-81, 90).  His July
2003 admission records described him as a 40-year old process manager of a major
aerospace firm who was admitted to the hospital’s inpatient unit for alcohol detoxification
(ex. 2).  Hospital records document that once admitted, he “quickly started showing signs
of acute withdrawal” (see ex. 2).  His admission records indicate he was  diagnosed with
(1) ethanol withdrawal, major depression, and alcohol dependency, all on the Axis scale
of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual (the DSM) (Ivth ed. 2004). His admission intake
summary, in turn, described him as profoundly depressed (ex. 2).  His IH medical team
started him on Zoloft to address his depression symptoms, along with other anti-
depressants.  He was administered Depakote to prevent acute withdrawal symptoms.  
After 72 hours of treatment, Applicant displayed marked improvements in
functioning and resolution of his depression symptoms (see ex. 2).  He was discharged
four days after his admission with an unchanged diagnosis.
After completing the inpatient program, Applicant adhered to a regiment of self-
imposed abstinence for about 11 months before he returned to alcohol consumption (Tr.
73, 82-83).  During this time, he attended AA meetings three to four times a week without
the support of a sponsor (Tr. 72-73).  Gin continued to be his drink of choice on
weekdays and on weekends (Tr. 84). And by 2005, he had progressed to consuming two
fifths of gin a week, and maintained this level of alcohol consumption for about seven
months (Tr. 84, 108-09).  
By July 2005, Applicant realized he needed help and asked his employee’s
assistance program for professional references (Tr. 70).  He checked himself into AC’s
outpatient counseling program. The program consisted of twice-weekly counseling
sessions and encouraged abstinence (Tr. 70). He is certain she diagnosed him as
alcoholic (Tr. 71).  Despite her diagnosis, Applicant continued to drink occasionally (viz.,
one large glass of gin a week) during his four months of enrollment in her program, a
practice he continued for several years after he completed her program in October 2005
(Tr.84 -86, 95).  During this time, he never attended AA sessions (Tr. 95),
Applicant resumed his attending AA meetings in September 2008, and has not
consumed alcohol since August 2008 (Tr. 76-77, 100).  He has a sponsor and regularly
attends AA meetings two to three times a week (Tr. 74). He regularly works the 12 steps
of the “Big Book” and exchanges stories of his alcohol experiences with other members
4
of his AA chapter (Tr. 74). Applicant documents his receipt of two AA chips that
commemorate his sustained abstinence since September 2008 (see ex. M; Tr. 76-77,
100).  
Beginning in October 2008, Applicant initiated consultations with a different
licensed substance abuse counselor (see exs. J and L; Tr. 88-90). He met with this
counselor (Dr. PD) for a second time in July 2009 (ex. J).  In both sessions with
Applicant, Dr. PD (a licensed clinical psychologist) took some background history from
Applicant (ex. J) and noted his prior bouts of depression, his family alcohol history, and
his active involvement in AA. Dr. PD assigned Applicant a diagnosis of alcohol
dependence in early remission and recommended he continue with his AA program (ex.
J).  In a follow-up session two months later, Dr. PD noted Applicant’s progress since his
initial session and upgraded his diagnosis to alcohol dependence, in early full remission
(see ex. L.). Dr. PD’s upgraded diagnosis indicates a much more positive diagnosis for
Applicant.  Applicant, for himself, assures he will continue to attend AA meetings two to
three times a week, maintain his sobriety, and adhere to the prescribed
recommendations of his AA sponsor and treatment counselors (Tr. 76).  
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by his colleagues and coworkers (see exs. A through
F). They characterize him as loyal, responsible, and trustworthy (exs. A through F).
None of his references ever saw him abuse alcohol in their presence (Tr. 27, 45, 49; 56-
57, and 62).  None of these colleagues expressed any awareness of his completing
alcohol detoxification and counseling programs before the initiation of this hearing
process (Tr. 31-32, 45, 62-64, and 84).  His direct supervisor credits him  with a strong
work ethic (Tr. 59). Applicant documents solid outstanding performance evaluations for
the past three years (see ex. K) and is generally considered a high value contributor to
his engineering team. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied.  Although, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs,
5
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
See AG ¶ 21.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
6
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
531 (1988). 
The administrative judge’s decision to grant or deny a clearance is not a final
decision unless the parties choose not to appeal.  See Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 to E3.3.39.
DOHA’s Appeal Board may reverse the administrative judge’s “decision to grant, deny,
or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.”  ISCR Case
No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (citing ¶ E1.32.3).  Appeal boards and federal
courts review the administrative judge’s factual determinations to ensure they are
supported by substantial evidence in the record, and regularly defer to the administrative
judge’s credibility determinations and inferences from the evidence.  See, e.g., See v.
Washington Metro Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 382 (4  Cir. 1994).  See also ISCRth
Case No. 09-03773 at 7-8 n. 5-7 (App. Bd. Jan. 29, 2010) (explaining appellate remedies
when hearing-level judges err).
Analysis
Applicant is a highly-regarded employee of a defense contractor with a history of
drinking abuses and diagnosed alcohol dependence. Applicant’s exhibited alcohol abuse
raises security concerns covered by Guideline G of the Adjudicative Guidelines.  
Applicant’s extended history of alcohol abuse over a 15-year period, as well as his
multiple treatment referrals for detoxification (2003) and management of his alcohol
dependence issues (2005), raise major concerns over his risk of recurrent alcohol abuse.
On the strength of the evidence presented, three disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Adjudication Guidelines for alcohol consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: 22(a),
“alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence,
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent,” ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and ¶ 22(d), diagnosis by a duly-qualified medical professional (e.g.,
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.”
To Applicant’s credit, he detected warning signs of his drinking abuses and sought
professional treatment. He returned to light to moderate drinking, though, after being
given a dependence diagnosis at in July 2003.  He resumed his alcohol consumption as
7
well following several months of alcohol counseling between July and October 2005, and
continued his occasional consumption of alcohol until August 2008 before quitting
altogether.
When faced with recurrent alcohol-related arrests over a considerable period of
time, and the absence of any sustained abstinence, the Appeal Board has expressed
reluctance to make safe, predictive judgments about an applicant’s ability to avoid
abusive incidents in the future without strong probative evidence of sustained recovery,
aided by positive professional reinforcements.  See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 (App. Bd.
Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007); ISCR Case No. 05-
16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007). However, these cases stand in marked contrast to
Applicant’s situation.
 The facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case are quite different from the
patterns in the cited ISCR cases above.  Applicant has not been involved in any alcohol-
related incident since 1991, and has consistently sought professional assistance when
he had concerns about returning to abusive drinking.  He has demonstrated considerable
responsibility in dealing with his alcohol problem.
True, family history, a prior DUI incident, and  multiple treatment admissions have
hampered Applicant’s ability to establish a long-term recovery regimen. His only DUI is
quite aged, however, and he has had no alcohol-related incidents of any kind since his
lone 1991 DUI offense.  Even more important are the series of voluntary corrective steps
he has taken to address his drinking when it became apparent to him that alcohol was
posing a problem for him.  Applicant has continued to seek professional help to identify
and mitigate his drinking excesses, and continues to receive counseling today. He has
established a strong 12-step AA program, and with the aid of the network support it
provides, he has been able to sustain his self-imposed abstinence for over a year.  He
has an earned one-year chip from his AA chapter to commemorate his efforts. His efforts
have prompted his current substance abuse counselor to upgrade his diagnosis to
dependence in full remission: a important indicator of the corrective steps he has taken
to control his alcohol consumption. 
 Certainly, Applicant’s willingness to voluntarily submit professional evaluations of
his treatment episodes and indicated progress over the past six years are important
considerations in determining what weight to assign to Applicant’s rehabilitation claims.
See ISCR Case 02-03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006); ISCR Case 01-20579 at 5 (App. Bd.
Apr. 14, 2004). His recovery efforts to date have been significant and offer a good deal of
promise for his long-range recovery from alcohol abuse and dependence. With the
support of his sponsor and his AA network, he has been able to sustain his self-imposed
abstinence for over a year, and has earned AA chips to commemorate his year of
abstinence.  He has not experienced any kind of alcohol-related incident away from work
since his last DUI in August 1991, and he presents little risk now in light of the passage
of time of any recurrent incident in the foreseeable future.
8
Despite Applicant’s assurances of his sincere abstinence commitment, and a solid
year-plus of sustained abstinence, his time in sobriety is still relatively short, when
assessed against a backdrop of recurrent drinking abuses over a 25-year period.  With a
family history of alcohol dependence, a recurrent pattern of diagnosed alcohol
dependence diagnoses within the past six years, and a medical condition (diagnosed
depression) that could be exacerbated by any concurrent use of alcohol in during any
recurrent depression episode, there is enough to warrant the application of disqualifying
conditions, subject to any carefully considered mitigating conditions that takes into
account his current abstinence regimen. 
On balance, under these circumstances, there is ample evidence of record to
accord Applicant the full benefit of several mitigating conditions: MC ¶ 23(a), “so much
time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” MC ¶ 23(b), “the individual acknowledges
his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and MC ¶ 23(d), “the individual has
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any
required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.”
Whole-person evaluations of Applicant’s recovery efforts and strong
endorsements from his supervisors and colleagues establish that Applicant is a
responsible contractor employee who has been able to inspire trust and reliance in his
work and overall contributions to his team and community. With the aid of his AA support
system, and respectable period of self-imposed sobriety, Applicant has been able to
persuade his treating substance abuse counselor to upgrade his principal diagnosis of
Applicant from alcohol dependence, in early remission, to alcohol dependence, in
sustained full remission. This represents an important milestone for Applicant and
demonstrates that his current counselor is persuaded that Applicant is fully committed to
his recovery.  Applicant’s efforts fully document his commitment to abstinence. 
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, his strong work
record, the applicable guidelines, and a whole person assessment of his most recent
alcohol abstinence efforts and upgraded diagnosis, conclusions warrant that he has the
resource support at his disposal to avert any recurrent problems with judgment lapses
related to alcohol.  Applicant’s mitigation efforts are enough at this time to warrant safe
predictions that he is no longer at risk to judgment impairment associated with alcohol
abuse.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the
alcohol consumption guideline of the SOR. 
9
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs.
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):       FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.d:                For Applicant 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's access to classified
information.   Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
