                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 08-11792 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In October 1998, Applicant’s debts were discharged through Chapter 7 of the 
Bankruptcy Code. His statement of reasons (SOR) lists eight delinquent debts totaling 
$24,543, which were incurred after his bankruptcy. His history of financial problems, 
combined with his failure to make sufficient effort to resolve four of his delinquent debts, 
causes security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions 
(SF 86) (Item 5). On June 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant (Item 1), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended and modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) 
(Item 1). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked (Item 1). 
 
On July 8, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 2, 2009, was provided to 
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 4, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted responsibility for the six debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h.3 He also admitted additional delinquent debts 
were discharged in October 1998 under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. He also 
described his resolution or attempted resolution of the six debts he admitted. He denied 
the remainder of the delinquent debts. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor.4 He has been an 
aircraft electrician/mechanic for 25 years (Item 4 at 3). He served in the U.S. Marine 
Corps from August 1974 to August 1978. When he received his honorable discharge, 
he was an E-5 (Item 4 at 4). He married his spouse in 1976. His two children were born 
in 1997 and 1995. He attended college from September 1997 to December 2000. From 
November 1983 to the present, he was unemployed three times: (1) from August 1997 
to February 1998; (2) from January to February 2000; and (3) from November 2001 to 
January 2002.  In 2008, he was deployed to Iraq on behalf of his employer (Item 4 at 4). 
He has held a security clearance and worked on classified projects for many years (Item 
4 at 4). 
 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated October 5, 2009; and Applicant’s receipt is dated November 
19, 2009 (file). The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to 
submit information (file). On December 9, 2009, Applicant requested an extension, and DOHA granted an 
extension until January 18, 2010 (file). 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
July 8, 2009, SOR response (Item 4). 
 
4Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
March 5, 2008, SF 86 (Item 5). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant did not disclose any unpaid judgments, unpaid liens, garnishments, 
illegal drug use, alcohol-related offenses, or felonies on his March 5, 2008, security 
clearance application. He disclosed that a vehicle was repossessed in August 2006, 
and that the creditor sought about $10,000; however, he did not disclose any debts 
currently delinquent over 90 days, or 180 days delinquent in the last seven years.     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists eight delinquent debts totaling $24,543. A detailed 
description of the status of those debts follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($167) and 1.b ($1,109)—DEBTS MERGED,5 BUT UNRESOLVED. 
These two telecommunications debts related to the same delinquent account. Applicant 
said he disputed the $1,109 portion (Item 4 at 1). He offered to pay the creditor $167 to 
settle the debt; however, the creditor refused this offer (Item 4 at 1).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($8,015)—UNRESOLVED. Applicant did not make his car payments 
as agreed (Item 4 at 1). Although he was discussing the payments with the creditor, the 
creditor involuntarily repossessed his vehicle (Item 4 at 1). In his March 5, 2008, SF 86, 
he explained the creditor “was not interested in resolving the problem” (Item 5 at 9). On 
July 8, 2009, he said that he took responsibility for the debt and promised to make 
payments when he had resolved his other debts (Item 4 at 1). He did not provide any 
correspondence with the creditor. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,194)—UNRESOLVED. Applicant admitted responsibility for this 
debt, and said he has “made arrangements to repay this debt at $100 per month” (Item 
4 at 2). However, he did not indicate he had made any payments. There is insufficient 
evidence that Applicant has an established payment plan. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($104)—PAID. Applicant admitted responsibility for this medical debt, 
and said he paid it on July 2, 2009 (Item 4 at 2). Although he did not provide any 
documentary evidence establishing this debt was paid, I accept his uncorroborated 
averment as fact.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,695)—UNRESOLVED. Applicant denied responsibility for this debt 
and said he had been disputing it for many months (Item 4 at 2). He did not provide the 
correspondence with the creditor showing the basis of the dispute. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($42)—PAID. Applicant admitted responsibility for this debt, and said 
he paid it on November 5, 2008 (Item 4 at 2, 8). He provided correspondence from the 
creditor, which corroborated his statement of payment (Item 4 at 2).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h ($12,217)—RESOLVED. Applicant admitted responsibility for this 
debt (Item 4 at 2). On January 17, 2009, the creditor accepted Applicant’s quit claim 
 
5The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is mitigated as a duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
deed to settle the debt (Item 4 at 9). He provided the quit claim deed to corroborate his 
statement about resolution (Item 4 at 9).  
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement includes the following information: his 
gross monthly salary is $8,500;6 his monthly net salary is $6,500; his monthly expenses 
are $5,350; his monthly debt payments are $1,405; and his monthly net remainder is 
$45 (Item 6 at 4). 
 
Applicant explained that the 1998 bankruptcy resulted from lack of income while 
Applicant was in college (Item 6 at 5). Their son was born, and his wife was unable to 
work outside the home (Item 6 at 5). 
  
On February 16, 2009, Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories (Item 6 at 
2). The DOHA interrogatories asked him to “provide documentation verifying payments, 
and current status” of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c to 1.h, and two other non-SOR 
debts. He denied knowledge of the two non-SOR debts (Item 6 at 5). He addressed the 
other SOR debts by sending a letter to the creditors asking for confirmation of the debt 
and the amount to settle the debt, if confirmed (Item 6 at 11). He explained: 
 
[He] fell into the housing finance trap. We took a bad home loan, foolishly, 
that really put us over our heads based on the income we were making at 
that time.7 Thus the reason we are, right now, working backwards to 
resolve old credit issues. 
 
(Item 6 at 5). 
 
Applicant noted that he and his wife have “spent time with financial advisors to 
help [them] understand and change [their] money management skills.” (Item 4 at 3). 
Their financial management advisor has shown Applicant correct ways to budget (Item 
4 at 3). 
   
The FORM at 6 reminded Applicant that additional corroborating documentation 
was important to resolving security concerns stating: 
 
However, in the absence of additional documentary evidence 
submitted in response to this FORM to show that Applicant has 
acted in “good faith” to repay or settle his unresolved debts, as 
 
6Applicant provided a pay statement, dated October 3, 2008, indicating his gross pay to date for 
2008 was $114,641 (Item 6 at 12). His gross pay for September 12-25, 2008, was $8,401 (Item 6 at 12). 
His pay statement for January 16-29, 2009, was $6,003 (Item 6 at 13). A substantial part of his income is 
from overtime.     
 
7Applicant’s credit report includes a $290,000 mortgage, which was 120 days past due until it was 
settled for less than full balance (Item 6 at 8; Item 7 at 6). The foreclosure account was closed in January 
2008 (Item 6 at 8; Item 7 at 6). No adverse inference is drawn from this debt because it was not listed on 
the SOR, and Applicant has not had an adequate opportunity to fully explain the circumstances of this 
debt’s resolution.      
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
represented in his Answer, and to document his utilization of 
financial counseling, Applicant’s overall financial instability remains a 
lingering concern impacting his eligibility for a security clearance.    
 
Id. (emphasis in original). Applicant did not provide any documentation after he received 
the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” “It 
is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally meet the 
substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations under [Directive] ¶ 
E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish 
either that [he or] she is not responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply.” 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (internal citation omitted). 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his response 
to DOHA interrogatories, and his SOR response. His debts, including a delinquent car 
loan and several collection accounts, have been delinquent for a substantial period of 
time.  
 
Applicant paid two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f). One debt was a duplication (SOR 
¶ 1.a). Another debt was resolved through a quit claim deed (SOR ¶ 1.h). Applicant said 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
he was starting a payment plan on one debt (SOR 1.d). He said he was disputing two 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f). After he paid his other debts, he planned to start a payment 
plan on SOR ¶ 1.c. However, he did not provide any supporting documentary evidence 
of such payments, such as an account statement from the creditor or his bank account 
statements. There is insufficient evidence of an established payment plan. He did not 
provide sufficient information about his overall financial situation to establish that he was 
unable to start payment plans on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. 
       
The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c). Additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions is 
required.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because he did not establish that his financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether Applicant is fully committed to resolving his delinquent 
SOR debts and is making adequate steps to do so.  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by 
unemployment from August 1997 to February 1998, from January to February 2000, 
and from November 2001 to January 2002. The first period of unemployment caused 
his bankruptcy in October 1998. However, he has not been unemployed since January 
2002, and has ample income to address his delinquent debts. He has not provided 
sufficient evidence to establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances with 
respect to his unresolved SOR debts. The two income statements he provided appear 
to indicate that he had income in 2008 of substantially more than $100,000. He did not 
prove that he had insufficient income to resolve or at least to establish payment plans 
for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f.8  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant and his wife spent time with financial 
advisors to help them understand and change their money management skills. They 
learned how to budget. This is sufficient to satisfy the financial counseling requirement. 
He generated a budget as part of his personal financial statement. Applicant cannot 
receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(c) because he has not paid, started payment plans, 
adequately disputed, or otherwise resolved four of his SOR debts. There are some 
initial, positive “indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” He 
has admitted some responsibility for three of the four unresolved SOR debts. Although 
he may have a payment plan on one debt (SOR ¶ 1.d), he did not provide 
documentation showing any payments to this creditor. He promised to eventually 
resolve his debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He also established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) 
because he showed some good faith9 in the resolution of his SOR debts by admitting 
responsibility for most of his SOR debts, payment of two SOR debts, resolving his time-
share with a quit claim deed, and promising to resolve his delinquent SOR debts.  
 
 
8“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
9The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant said he disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f. He also thought the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c treated him unfairly when his vehicle was involuntarily 
repossessed. However, he did not provide evidence showing he has “a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of [his] past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e) cannot be applied to mitigate 
these three debts. 
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He has had steady employment for more 
than five years, and he has not shown significant progress on his SOR debts. His steps 
are simply inadequate to fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant is 53 years old. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He has been an aircraft 
electrician/mechanic for 25 years. In 2008, he was deployed to Iraq on behalf of his 
employer. He has held a security clearance and worked on classified projects for many 
years. He attended college from September 1997 to December 2000. He married his 
spouse in 1976. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps from August 1974 to August 1978. 
When he received his honorable discharge from the Marine Corps, he was an E-5. He 
deserves substantial credit for volunteering to support the Department of Defense as an 
employee of a defense contractor. There is no evidence that he has ever violated 
security rules. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States, the 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Department of Defense, and his employer. There is no evidence that he abuses alcohol 
or uses illegal drugs. He has never been fired from a job or left employment under 
adverse circumstances. His unemployment from August 1997 to February 1998, from 
January to February 2000, and from November 2001 to January 2002 contributed to his 
financial woes. He paid two debts for $104 and $42. He resolved his time-share debt 
using a quit claim deed. One SOR debt is a duplication of another SOR debt. These 
factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a history of financial problems. He began to have financial 
difficulties several years ago during a period of unemployment. In October 1998, his 
debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. In February 2008, he 
was fully aware of the debts raising security concerns when he responded to DOHA 
interrogatories, and in July 2009, in his SOR response, he discussed his SOR debts. He 
had ample notice of his delinquent SOR debts, and sufficient opportunity to contact his 
creditors. He did not make sufficient progress in the resolution of his SOR debts. He did 
not pay, start payments, document and justify any disputes, or otherwise resolve four 
SOR debts. He had sufficient income to make greater progress. I do not accept his 
statement that he was starting a payment plan on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d as sufficient to 
show he has an established payment plan on this debt. His promise to pay the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c is insufficient to mitigate this debt because he has had the income to start a 
payment plan and has not done so. The FORM provided clear notice to Applicant that 
additional documentation was essential to show his efforts to resolve several SOR 
debts; however, he did not provide any documentation in response to the FORM.  
 
In conclusion, Applicant made insufficient progress to resolve his delinquent SOR 
debts, even though he had steady employment for the last seven years and ample 
opportunity to contact his SOR creditors and provide documentation. He was on clear 
notice from his receipt of DOHA interrogatories, and even more so after he received the 
SOR and the FORM, that he needed to show substantial progress in the resolution of 
his delinquent SOR debts; however, he did not provide documentation showing his 
efforts to accomplish this security responsibility.    
   
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my 
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the 
government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.d: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g to 1.i:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
