1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 08-10771
SSN:----------------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence shows
Applicant’s financial history includes four state tax liens for multiple tax years and one
federal tax lien for multiple tax years. In total, the liens amount to more than $37,000 in
back taxes. He has not paid, settled, or resolved the tax liens. He is not making a good-
faith effort to resolve the liens. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided
against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to
this case. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Exhibit A. 2
 Exhibit 1. 3
 Tr. 82. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on August 19,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether or not to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. In
doing so, he admitted the factual allegations addressing the tax liens, and he denied the
single allegation addressing an unpaid collection account based on an apartment lease.
The case was assigned to me November 17, 2009. The hearing took place February 3,
2010. The transcript (Tr.) was received February 12, 2010.   
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR are incorporated herein. Based
on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial
evidence.
Applicant is a 57-year-old engineer who is seeking an industrial security
clearance. He has held an interim clearance, without a negative incident, while his case
was pending. Applicant held a security clearance many years ago (approximately 1985),
when he was a Sailor in the U.S. Navy.  2
He has worked as a controls engineer on behalf of a federal contractor since
about August 2008, which is when he submitted his security clearance application.  For3
2008, Applicant estimated the gross income for his household (he’s married) at $70,000
to $80,000; for 2009, he estimated $140,000.4
 Exhibit 3. 5
 Exhibit 3. 6
 Tr. 66–67. 7
 Tr. 70–73. 8
 Tr. 83. 9
 Tr. 84. 10
 Tr. 85. 11
 Tr. 85–86. 12
 Tr. 84–85. 13
 Exhibit 2. 14
3
Applicant has a history of financial problems that are related to state and federal
income taxes. He is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service for approximately $17,652
in back taxes for tax years 1989, 1990, and 1991. The IRS filed a federal tax lien
against Applicant for that amount in March 1997.  He is indebted to a state tax authority5
for nearly $20,000 in back taxes for tax years 1984, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1995,
1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999. The state filed a total of four liens against Applicant for
various amounts in 1993, 2001, and 2004.  6
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the existence of the liens, but
contended the liens were invalid and that he needed to dispute the liens, which would
take time and money. At the hearing, he claimed the liens were invalid because they are
not based on real or valid information.  He also claimed that he has not been engaged7
in a taxable activity for which he may be held accountable.8
At the hearing, Applicant admitted he had not filed an income tax return with the
IRS since 1991.  He did not recall when he last filed a return with the IRS.  Likewise,9 10
he has not filed an income tax return in the state where he has lived and worked since
2007.  He claimed that he is a resident of Florida,  a state that does not have a11 12
personal income tax, although he has not lived and worked in Florida on a full-time
basis since 2003. He also admitted that, since beginning his current employment in
2008, he has not had state or federal income taxes withheld from his paycheck.  13
In addition to the tax liens, the SOR alleges an unpaid collection account of
$8,717. Applicant disputes this debt because he does not believe he owes the stated
amount. This debt was incurred in about 2004, when Applicant and his wife vacated an
apartment before the lease expired.  They departed early because his wife was14
exhibiting symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder following the discovery of her
deceased sister in the apartment. Applicant vacated the apartment because he believed
 Exhibit 2. 15
 Tr. 46–55. 16
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to17
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).21
4
doing so was a medical necessity. In a written notice to the landlord, Applicant agreed
he was liable for a termination penalty of $3,746 and prorated rent of $664, but disputed
a charge of $3,292 due to insufficient notice.  To date, Applicant has not paid, settled,15
or otherwise resolved any of the debt. 
The company president testified on Applicant’s behalf.  The company president16
was unfamiliar with Applicant’s tax situation, but he was able to provide testimony about
Applicant’s attributes as an employee. Overall, the company president evaluated
Applicant as a highly skilled employee who has been a valuable asset to the company. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As17
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,18
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An19
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  20
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 25
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).26
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.27
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating28
conditions). 
5
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An22
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate23
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme24
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.25
The Agency’s appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.26
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the27
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant28
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 18.  29
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(a).  30
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(c). 31
 ISCR Case No. 94-1153 (App. Bd. Mar. 26, 1997) (also, the Board notes and summarizes numerous federal32
court decisions that have rejected challenges to the federal tax laws and IRS regulations and practices).
Likewise, see ISCR Case 98-0810 (App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2000) (the Board notes and summarizes numerous
federal court decisions that have rejected challenges to the federal tax laws and IRS regulations and
practices). 
6
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  29
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The record here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties as shown by the state and federal tax liens, which represent
approximately $37,000 in back taxes. This history raises concerns because it indicates
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial30
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are more than sufficient to31
establish these two disqualifying conditions, and they suggest financial irresponsibility
as well.  
As I understand his position, Applicant asserts that no law requires him to pay
state or federal income taxes because the income he earns from his work does not
amount to a taxable activity. The DOHA Appeal Board has made it clear, however, that
a security clearance case is not an appropriate forum for contesting the legality of
income tax laws:
If Applicant wishes to challenge the constitutionality and legality of federal
tax laws (and IRS regulations and practices), then he must seek redress
elsewhere. Under the Directive, DOHA Administrative Judges and the
Board are authorized to adjudicate industrial security clearance cases, not
the constitutionality and legality of federal tax laws and IRS regulations
and practices. In recognition of the limits of the jurisdiction of DOHA
Administrative Judges and this Board under the Directive, the rulings of
federal courts on the legality and constitutionality of the federal tax laws
and IRS practices and procedures must be accepted and applied in DOHA
proceedings.32
Applicant has provided no legal authority for his position, and I am aware of no decision
from a state or federal court that supports his position. If he is serious about his position,
he needs to seek redress in the appropriate forum.  
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 33
 Exhibits 4 and 5. 34
7
Under ¶ 20 of Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security
concerns.  The six conditions are as follows: 33
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Concerning the landlord-tenant debt, Applicant disputes the amount owed, but he
has been dilatory in addressing it. Still, Applicant receives credit under ¶ 20(a) because
(1) the behavior that resulted in the debt happened several years ago; (2) it is the sole
consumer debt at issue as the credit reports  here reflect no other collection or34
charged-off accounts; and (3) it occurred under usual circumstances—which Applicant
believed amounted to a medical necessity—that are unlikely to recur. Given these
circumstances, the landlord-tenant debt by itself or in combination with the tax issues
does not present an undue security concern. On this basis, SOR ¶ 1.f is decided for
Applicant.  
 
Concerning the tax issues, all of the mitigating conditions have been considered
and none apply in Applicant’s favor. In contrary, the tax liens and $37,000 in back taxes
were due to circumstances within his control and resulted from his own acts or
omissions or both. His tax issues are ongoing and likely to continue. The amounts
specified in the tax liens are presumed to be accurate, and Applicant did not present
 See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted).  35
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).36
8
any reliable information to challenge or dispute their accuracy. He has not made a
good-faith effort to resolve the tax issues. This is demonstrated by, among other things,
his failure to file income tax returns, which represents the antithesis of good faith.
Although his failure to file was not alleged in the SOR, I considered it for limited
purposes, such as: to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed
circumstances; to consider if Applicant has demonstrated successful reform and
rehabilitation; and as part of my whole-person analysis.  35
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s tax liens and
$37,000 in back taxes justify current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. He did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate
those concerns. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence. Applicant did not meet his36
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
