                                                              
 
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-10644 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2007, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86).1 On June 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
 
1 Applicant had previously completed a security clearance application (SF-86) on March 26, 
2007, which was included with the government exhibits, and will be discussed infra. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR through counsel on July 8, 2009, and DOHA 
received such answers on July 13, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on July 22, 2009. On August 13, 2009, the case was assigned to me. On September 4, 
2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for October 1, 2009. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through Q, which 
were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 
9, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old systems engineering manager, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since January 1983. He has held a secret security 
clearance since March 1983 until it was suspended as a result of these proceedings.3 
The pending inquiry stems from Applicant seeking to upgrade his security clearance to 
top secret. Maintaining a security clearance is a condition of Applicant’s continued 
employment. Tr. 22-23, 54-56, GE 1, GE 2. Applicant has never had a security violation. 
He does not have a police record. Tr. 30, GE 1, GE 2. 
 
 Applicant was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science in 
May 1980. He married in August 1982, and has two daughters, ages 21 and 18. Tr. 24, 
56, GE 1, GE 2.  
 
Drug Involvement   
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency between 1976 and 1983 (ages 
18 to 25), and from 1998 to 2007 (ages 30 to 49). Tr. 26. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) He stated he 
used marijuana in the company of two individuals, a life-long friend (old friend), and a 
relatively recent acquaintance (new friend). He “grew up” with the old friend and he met 
the new friend more recently through his wife and children. Applicant and his old friend 
would occasionally go ocean fishing and smoke marijuana while fishing. Applicant’s new 
 
2 Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 A review of the case file reflects the Defense Security Service (DSS) suspended Applicant’s 
security clearance on February 9, 2009. GE 4. 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
friend is a jeweler, whom he described as “a very artistic type person.” Applicant 
typically would have a “hit” of marijuana when he was at his new friend’s house with his 
wife. Applicant and his new friend smoked marijuana when they were “basically outside” 
and their spouses were inside. Applicant last smoked marijuana with his new friend on 
January 1, 2007. He stated that he no longer smokes marijuana with his old or new 
friends. Tr. 27-28.  
 
During cross-examination, Applicant admitted attending numerous briefings over 
the years concerning prohibitions against use of illegal drugs, and he acknowledged 
drug use was inconsistent with holding a security clearance. Tr. 34-35. Applicant 
testified that he had difficulty recalling the exact number of times he used marijuana with 
his old and new friends. Although Applicant manifested genuine uncertainty about past 
marijuana use, I am satisfied that he did use marijuana with varying frequency during 
this timeframes alleged while holding a security clearance. Tr. 36-47. The apparent 
catalyst that led up to Applicant’s marijuana use again in 1998 after a five-year break 
was the environment of being on his old friend’s fishing boat. Tr. 45. 
 
On July 8, 2009, Applicant provided a statement in accordance with AG ¶ 26(b) 
to demonstrate his intent not to abuse illegal drugs in the future. He provided “a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of [his] clearance for any violation” Tr. 29, 
AE M.  
 
When queried why anyone would believe him about no longer using drugs, 
Applicant responded: 
 
Well, I realize I made a mistake. I was basically in shellshock when I, I 
realized, when I was applying for the SCI clearance, the great mistake I 
made at that time. My, and, so basically, mentally, I wrote that Statement 
of Intent back at that time. And I’m basically, have always been a very 
trustworthy person. I realized I’ve erred. And when I have my evaluation 
with my psychiatrist, I came out feeling responsible for the actions that I’ve 
taken. I messed up and just would like the, you know, Court to understand 
that. I dedicated, you know, a good 25 years of my life to, you know, 
defending this country and I’d like to continue that. Tr. 30. 
 
Applicant testified that he does not condone drug use. Tr. 30. Applicant had filled 
out an application to renew his security clearance in 2002, and was granted a security 
clearance in June 2002. As noted supra, Applicant has held a security clearance since 
1983, and used marijuana after being granted a security clearance. Tr. 46-47, GE 5. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In April 2007, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) for 
sensitive compartmented information (SCI) with another government agency. On his 
SF-86, he listed illegal drug use of “pot” a “couple” of times between January 1, 2006 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
and January 1, 2007 while holding a sensitive position. On May 31, 2007, he was 
interviewed by an adjudicator and stated that within the past 12 months, he smoked 
marijuana two to three times. When asked how many times he used marijuana in the 
past seven years, Applicant explained that his old friend went boating four times a 
summer. He advised that he and his old friend would “get high” by smoking a marijuana 
cigarette on numerous occasions. When asked if 28 times was an accurate number of 
uses, Applicant estimated that he “got high” about one-half of those times. He ultimately 
agreed to using marijuana 14 times in the past seven years. When given the opportunity 
to review his answers, Applicant mentioned another marijuana use around February 
2006. He agreed that he may have used marijuana three to four times in 2006 instead 
of the two to three times as previously stated. On August 14, 2007, that government 
agency denied Applicant SCI access. Tr. 48-50, 52, GE 4. (SOR ¶ 2.a.) 
 
 In the SOR, Applicant was cited for submitting false or incomplete information 
regarding past drug use on his April 2002 SF-86 and on his March 2007 SF-86. In 
particular, Applicant listed past marijuana use on his March 2007 SF-86 as “a couple of 
times from about January 2006 to January 2007,” whereas his use was from at least 
2001 to January 2007. (SOR ¶¶ 2.b. – 2.c.) Applicant acknowledged the information 
submitted on those SF-86s is incorrect, but added it was not his intent to deliberately 
mislead the government. He explained: 
 
I, I thought about trying to answer it. I know I did it in the past. I was not 
trying to make myself out to be a heavy drug user, which I am not, since in 
all cases when I did do it, it was merely taking one or two puffs. And it’s 
very hard to recall when, when you’re doing these, what transpired, 
looking back into the past. During some of these years in the past, it’s – I 
have been under a lot of stress at work because my company, we went 
through a merger with our competitor. And since we merged with our 
competitor, they’ve constantly been trying to kill us and our product. So 
I’ve had some very stressful times at work because I’m passionate about 
what we do, the product we make. That’s all my witnesses that were here, 
today. And what I find is when you sit with an interrogator, they, they tend 
to do their job well and bring out, they get you to go back in memory and 
go through that. Tr. 51. 
 
 As noted supra, Applicant has had difficulty recalling with any degree of certainty 
details regarding his past marijuana use. Having had the chance to observe him, I noted 
this difficulty. This is somewhat understandable given the fact his marijuana uses 
covered two significant periods of time from 1976 to 1883 and from 1998 to 2007. What 
is clear and as noted supra, I do believe that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency during these time periods. Applicant was forthcoming when questioned about 
past drug use such as when he was applying for SCI access with another government 
agency in May 2007 and when interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator in May 2008. GE 4, GE 5. 
 
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Character Evidence 
 
 Three witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf, a co-worker engineer, his 
operations manager, and his facility security officer. All three witnesses are long-term 
company employees and have held security clearances for many years. The witnesses 
see Applicant on a daily basis. They described Applicant as “one of the most dedicated 
employees,” “one of the[ir] best employees,” “demonstrate[s] a professional attitude,” 
and is “very trustworthy.” All of the witnesses support reinstatement of Applicant’s 
security clearance. Tr. 13-24. 
 
Applicant submitted at least ten favorable character reference letters from a 
cross section of individuals to include the three witnesses who testified on his behalf, his 
“old (childhood) friend,” former co-workers, present co-workers, father-in-law, close 
family friends, and supervisory personnel. The collective sense of these letters 
describes Applicant in a most favorable way. They used adjectives to describe Applicant 
such as “upfront and honest,” “reliable and totally trustworthy,” “direct and 
straightforward,” “knowledgeable and passionate [for] the company’s product,” 
“demonstrated leadership qualities,” “unwavering professionalism,” “compassion and 
honest,” “very hard working,” “gifted and talented engineer, and “one of the most 
dedicated staff members . . . in this business.” His supervisory personnel described the 
importance of Applicant’s work in support of national defense. All references fully 
support Applicant in retaining his security clearance. AE - G, AE I - L. 
 
Applicant provided a four-page biography that described his childhood, family life, 
education, work interests, and professional accomplishments. AE A. He submitted three 
years of employee evaluations covering the periods January 2006 to December 2008, 
which reflect above average performance. AE H. His employer gave him monetary 
awards in recognition of his performance on four occasions in May 2003, December 
2007, June 2009, and August 2009. AE P. He submitted two separate negative drug 
tests dated August 4, 2009 and August 18, 2009. AE N, AE O. Lastly, Applicant 
provided a Psychosocial Evaluation from a Board Certified Psychiatrist dated 
September 28, 2009. The psychiatrist provided a very favorable assessment of 
Applicant and described him as “a fine human being, who is dedicated to his work, 
ethic, principle and his family.” He noted Applicant acknowledged his mistakes and had 
no reason to doubt his honesty and sincerity.” Although the report is clearly favorable 
and discusses Applicant’s many fine qualities, it does not provide a formal prognosis. 
AE Q. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug-involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Applicant’s marijuana use discussed supra 
triggers two drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case. AG ¶ 25(a), indicates, “any 
drug abuse,”4 and AG ¶ 25(c) states, “illegal drug possession,” could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. The other disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 
are not applicable. These disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used and 
possessed marijuana.5 He disclosed his drug abuse in his August 2007 SF-86, his 
interview with another government agency’s adjudicators in April and May 2007, to an 
OPM investigator in May 2008, responses to DOHA interrogatories, and at his hearing. 
He possessed marijuana before he used this substance.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
 
4AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
5AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Sch. I(c)(9). See also Gonzales v. 
Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I); United States v. Crawford, 
449 F.3d 860, 861 (8th Cir. 2006). 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows “a significant 
period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative 
judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”6 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. The Appeal Board addressed the recency 
of drug use, stating:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 1976 to 1983, a period of 
seven years during the ages of 18 to 25, and resumed using marijuana with varying 
frequency from 1998 to January 2007, a period of nine years during the ages of 40 to 
49. I find it very troubling that Applicant resumed marijuana use while holding a security 
clearance (emphasis added) and knowing it was in violation of DOD policy. During 
Applicant’s second period of marijuana use, he was a mature family man, and a well 
regarded employee. Applicant did not have the fortitude or common sense to resist the 
temptations to repeatedly use marijuana knowing the potential adverse consequences.  
 
I am not convinced a sufficient amount of time has elapsed since Applicant’s last 
drug use in January 2007, taking into account the two lengthy periods of time he used 
marijuana, and the fact that he returned to using marijuana after a five-year break. At 
age 51, he claims to recognize the adverse impact of his lengthy and varying marijuana 
use. These recent assurances are not enough to overcome Applicant’s repeated breach 
of trust over time. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply to his drug-related offenses.7    
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. Applicant claims to have disassociated or distanced himself 
from his drug-using associates and contacts, although not enough to preclude his old 
friend from submitting a character letter on his behalf. AE C. He has abstained from 
drug abuse for approximately three years; however, as noted supra, Applicant’s three-
year abstinence is relatively short when contrasted with his drug use history. He did 
return to using drugs after five years of leading a drug-free life. Applicant provided “a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG 
¶ 26(b) partially apples.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. Marijuana 
was never prescribed for him. He did not satisfactorily complete a prescribed drug 
treatment program. Moreover, he cannot receive full credit because he did not provide 
“a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional, including rehabilitation 
and aftercare requirements.”  
 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
7In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in January 2007, about three years 
ago. However, given his history of returning to marijuana use for nine years while 
holding a security clearance after a five-year break does not provide me with the 
assurances required when evaluating security clearance suitability. In reaching this 
conclusion, I have considered the lengthy periods Applicant has used marijuana over his 
lifetime, his age, education, experience, family situation, and the fact he used marijuana 
while holding a security clearance or alternatively stated while in a position of trust and 
responsibility.8 Although Applicant has not used marijuana in approximately three years, 
I am not convinced that he has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record to 
mitigate past drug involvement.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process 
the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
 
8The Appeal Board has reversed decisions granting a clearance because the administrative judge 
considered individual acts of misconduct one-by-one and determined the isolated acts were mitigated. 
ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Dec. 
17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006). In ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 
(App. Bd. June 27, 2008), the Appeal Board explained it is the overall conduct that determines whether a 
clearance should be granted stating: 
 
The Judge's analysis of the numerous acts of misconduct in this record failed to reflect a 
reasonable interpretation of the record evidence as a whole.  By analyzing each category 
of incidents separately, the Judge failed to consider the significance of the “evidence as a 
whole” and Applicant's pattern of conduct. See, e.g., Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860, 
866 (2d Cir. 1972)(taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). Under the whole person concept, a 
Judge must consider the totality of Applicant's conduct when deciding whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0350 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 1999). The Judge’s 
piecemeal analysis of Applicant's overall conduct did not satisfy the requirements of ¶ 
E2.2 of the Directive. 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006), see Whole Person Concept at pages 
14-15, infra.  
 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
 
(d)(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.9 
 
In August 2007 Applicant was denied SCI access by another government agency 
due to his past drug involvement. AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying with respect to his denial of SCI access in 
this case: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
9The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
. . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; and 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
In April 2002 and March 2007, Applicant provided SF-86s that made inquiries 
about past drug use. Applicant denied and understated his past drug use, respectively. 
AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), and 16(d)(3) apply because he provided at least one SF-86 with 
false information about his marijuana use.  
 
Applicant’s application for SCI access with another government agency was 
denied because of his past marijuana use. He used marijuana while holding a DOD 
security clearance, which violated the conditions of his access. He associated with 
individuals who used marijuana. This behavior exposed Applicant to potential 
exploitation. It showed poor judgment and an inability to follow rules. AG ¶¶ 16(c) 
through 16 (f) apply. Further review is necessary. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant stated it was not his intent to deliberately falsify his security clearance 
applications. He was forthcoming when queried by two different investigators, and 
during his testimony. As noted supra, Applicant had difficulty in recalling the number of 
his marijuana uses over the years. When questioned, he admitted past use, but had 
difficulty recalling dates, the number of times, and when his use resumed after a 
minimum five-year break. His answers minimizing his past marijuana use were sufficient 
enough to put the government on notice that he had used marijuana in the past. 
Applicant acknowledged his answers were incorrect, but added that there was no intent 
on his part to deliberately falsify his SF-86s. That response may be sufficient when 
responding to questions about past drug use on his April 2002 SF-86, given the fact 
there was a minimum five-year gap between his two periods of marijuana use and the 
uncertainty about the start time of his second period of marijuana use. However, that 
response is not sufficient when explaining the minimized answer he gave on his March 
2007 SF-86 describing his past drug use. As noted supra, after another government 
agency adjudicator questioned him in May 2007, Applicant acknowledged using 
marijuana 14 times in the past seven years.10 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately. An omission of relevant and 
material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, 
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the 
information did not need to be reported. He was candid and forthright at his hearing 
about his past marijuana use. In evaluating his testimony, I note his memory has faded 
over time. However, given Applicant’s subsequent admitted extensive marijuana use 
during various inquiries, I do not find it plausible that that he honestly and reasonably 
believed the answer he provided when completing his March 2007 SF-86 to be truthful. 
Accordingly, I find Applicant purposely understated his past marijuana use when 
completing his March 2007 SF-86. 
 
Applicant’s character evidence supports the notion that he is an honest person. 
The testimony of his character witnesses and authors of his character reference letters 
 
10 See pages 3-4, supra. 
 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
also believe Applicant is an honest person. I conclude Applicant’s alleged falsification of 
his April 2002 SF-86 is mitigated, however, I conclude his alleged falsification of his 
March 2007 SF-86 is not mitigated. Although he provided incorrect information on his 
April 2002 SF-86, AG ¶ 17(f) applies. The falsification allegations are not substantiated. 
I am satisfied he did not deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose his past marijuana 
use with intent to deceive with respect the SOR ¶ 1.c.11  
 
The mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e), “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior” and “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” partially apply to mitigate 
his marijuana use and his falsification of SF-86s. Security officials and his employer are 
well aware of Applicant’s problems. Applicant has taken the positive step of disclosure, 
eliminating any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress with respect to this 
misconduct. I do not believe Applicant would compromise national security to avoid 
public disclosure of these problems.  
 
His denial of SCI access by another government agency in August 2007 due to 
drug involvement is another matter. His marijuana use and association with individuals 
who used marijuana while holding a security clearance in clear violation of DOD policy, 
which had the potential to serve as a basis for exploitation, support a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. AG ¶¶ 16(c) through 16(g) apply.  
 
Applicant deserves substantial credit in the whole person analysis for admitting 
his marijuana use when interviewed by an adjudicator from another government agency 
in May 2007, and by an OPM investigator in May 2008. He re-admitted his marijuana 
use at his hearing. I found Applicant’s admissions about his marijuana use at his 
hearing to be credible. However, the personal conduct concerns pertaining to 
Applicant’s denial of SCI access by another government agency in August 2007 cannot 
be mitigated at this time.  
 
 
 
 
11The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral change; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
has worked for his employer for 27 years. His supervisors, co-workers, and 
performance evaluations indicate he has made significant work-related contributions to 
the national defense industry throughout the years. All those who testified on his behalf 
and submitted character reference letters on his behalf, state he is a decent individual, 
who is a dedicated family man. He showed he had the ability to abstain from illegal drug 
use for at least a five-year period. During background investigations and at his hearing, 
he admitted his history of illegal drug use. He knows the consequences of drug abuse. 
There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant used marijuana over two separate cycles -- 1976 to 1983 and 1998 
to 2007. His decisions to possess and use marijuana (each time he used marijuana he 
made a separate decision about whether to violate the law) were knowledgeable, 
voluntary, and intentional. This is more than a brief youthful experimental use of 
marijuana. His decision to again using marijuana is further exacerbated given his age, 
experience, and employment in the defense industry while holding a security clearance. 
He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. These offenses show 
a serious lack of judgment and a failure to abide by the law. Such judgment lapses are 
material in the context of security requirements. His misconduct raises a serious 
security concern, and a security clearance is not warranted at this time.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement and personal conduct 
with regard to being denied SCI access due to drug involvement by another government 
agency in 2007. For reasons discussed supra, personal conduct concerns regarding 
falsification are mitigated.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”12 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 2.a. to 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance at this time.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
12See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
