                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10598 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On June 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 7, 2009, and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on September 16, 2009. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
mailed to Applicant on September 18, 2009, and it was received on October 8, 2009. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide additional information. The case 
was assigned to me on January 8, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 1.a. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and was employed by a federal contractor from 
September 2007 to November 2008. She served in the Air Force for 20 years and was 
honorably discharged. 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated she has experienced financial 
problems since 2006, due to health reasons and her inability to work. She has not 
worked full-time since April 4, 2008, and has had three back surgeries from 2006 to 
2008. She experienced a substantial reduction in income from $122,000 annually before 
her disability to $32,000. She no longer receives income or a disability payment. She 
admitted that because of the income reduction she has resorted to using credit cards to 
pay some expenses, which has caused additional financial problems. She is presently 
not working and living off a meager income. It is unknown what her present health 
problems are and whether they will affect her ability to work in the future.  
 
 Applicant admits the debt in SOR ¶1.a ($982) but disputes the amount, stating 
that she made a $600 payment, which had not been deducted from the balance. No 
documentation was provided to support her position and her credit report still reports the 
balance as stated above as owed.1 
 
 Applicant denies she owes the debt listed in SOR ¶1.b ($917) stating that it was 
paid off. She references her credit report of August 2, 2009, which shows a zero 
balance. No additional documentation was provided.2 
 
 Applicant admits that she owes the delinquent debt in SOR ¶1.c ($1,000) and 
stated that she will address the debt as soon as possible.3 
 
 Applicant denies the debts in SOR ¶ 1.d ($9,000) and 1.e ($8,000) for foreclosed 
mortgages. She stated that the debts were paid upon the completion of a short sale of 
1 Item 4 page 24. 
 
2 Item 4 pages 1, 22. 
 
3 Item 4 page 1. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
her home. Her credit report reflects the accounts have been paid in full for less that the 
full balance. No other documentation was provided.4 
 
 Applicant denies the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k (totaling $1,000, $30, 
$1,377 and $697, respectively). She stated that these accounts have been paid in full. 
Her credit report does not reflect her position. She stated she is disputing the debts. 
She did not provide documentary evidence that she paid the debts or that she has 
disputed them with the credit bureau.5 
 
 Applicant denies the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,000). It is no longer listed on her credit 
report.6 
 
 Applicant denies the debt in SOR ¶1.i ($315) stating she has a current payment 
plan with the creditor. She did not provide supporting documents showing the terms of 
the plans. However, her credit report reflects a reduced past-due balance of $65 and a 
prior monthly payment of $40.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
4 Item 4 pages 1, 19. 
 
5 Item 4 pages 1-2. 
 
6 Item 4 pages 3-28. 
 
7 Item 4 page 8. 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she has been unable or unwilling 
to satisfy for a period of time. I find both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Since 2006, Applicant has had financial problems due to her inability to work 
because of health issues. She has not worked full-time since April 2008, and it is 
unknown when or if she will be able to resume employment. She has paid some of her 
delinquent debts, but others remained unresolved. Due to Applicant’s current health and 
employment situation, I cannot find that the circumstances are unlikely to recur. I find 
mitigating condition (a) does not apply. Applicant has been on disability since 2008, 
which has significantly reduced her income. Applicant’s health predicament was a 
circumstance beyond her control. She has managed to pay some of her debts. Although 
she resorted to using credit cards to help pay her bills, I acknowledge that she likely has 
done the best she could have under the circumstances. I find mitigating condition (b) 
applies. There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. She is unable 
to pay some of her creditors and resolve some of her delinquent debts. I find it is too 
soon to determine that Applicant’s financial problems are under control and being 
resolved. I find mitigating condition (c) does not apply. I find mitigating condition (d) 
partially applies because Applicant has paid some debts and has not ignored her 
creditors.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the military for 
20 years and was honorably discharged. She began experiencing financial problems 
when she developed medical issues that affected her ability to work. Her income was 
drastically reduced when she went on disability, resulting in her inability to pay her bills. 
As a consequence, she resorted to using credit cards and accumulated more delinquent 
debts. Applicant did not produce documentary proof to support her statements that she 
paid certain debts. Until she is in a better position to resolve her delinquent debts, it is 
too early to conclude that her finances are not a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1. c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.j-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
