 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-10491 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On April 21, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 17, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 30, 2009, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing seven 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy the following day. Applicant received the 
FORM on December 28, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted a statement that I marked as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into the record without objection. On January 20, 
2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in 
Paragraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. He denied the allegations contained in Paragraphs 1.d, 
1.e, and 2.a. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and married. He has two children, ages 10 and 13, from 
a former marriage. He was married to his first wife from July 1996 to October 2004. 
Since April 1999, he has worked for a defense contractor. When he began his 
employment, he worked in the mailroom; he now holds a position as a technical account 
manager. He has received awards and promotions over the past 11 years. He attended 
college between 1993 and 1997. (Item 1; AE A.) 
 
 In April 2008, Applicant completed an e-QIP. He answered “No” to questions 
28(a) and 28(b), which asked whether he had been 180 days delinquent on any debts in 
the last 7 years, and whether he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts. 
(GE 1 at 33.) He did not list the five delinquents debts noted in the SOR, but included 
information about an outstanding credit card debt for $5,000, incurred in August 2006. 
(Id. at 33). He answered “Yes” to question 27(b) that asked whether he had his wages 
garnished or property repossessed for any reason in the past 7 years. He disclosed a 
garnishment order for child support that was entered in September 2004. Under 
additional comments he wrote, “Not sure of the judgments at this time, but believe there 
were a couple after my divorce.” (Id. at 32, 33.)  
 
 In April 2009, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories regarding delinquent 
debts listed on credit bureau reports, dated April 2008 and October 2008. He submitted 
civil pleadings that his lawyer filed relating to one of the listed creditors. He also 
submitted his budget, which recorded his net monthly salary as $3,800 and his spouse’s 
as $8,200, for a total net monthly income of $12,000. Their monthly expenses are 
$6,000. They make monthly payments of $5,091 on financial obligations, including a 
mortgage and credit cards, leaving $900 at the end of the month for other expenses. 
(Item 5.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated April 2008 and July 2009, 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR alleged five delinquent debts, totaling $30,598, which became 
delinquent between 2005 and 2006. (Items 6, 7.) The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
1. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for $5,077 is a credit card debt. Applicant 
asserted that the debt has been resolved through a civil case, dismissing the 
 
3 
 
 
matter against him. According to the July 2009 CBR, the debt has been 
disputed.1  
 
2. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b for $11,000 is owed to the same creditor as 
noted above. According to the July 2009 CBR, the debt has been disputed.  
 
3. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for $1,478 is a credit card debt. Applicant 
admitted that it is his debt. (Item 4.) It is unresolved. 
 
4. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d for $1,837 is a credit card debt. Applicant 
asserted that the debt is his father’s obligation. In his August 2009 answer, he 
stated that he intended to resolve it immediately. (Item 4.) It remains 
unresolved.  
 
5. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e for $4,106 is a credit card debt. Applicant 
asserted that the debt is his father’s obligation. In his August 2009 answer, he 
stated that he intended to resolve it immediately. (Item 4.) It remains 
unresolved.  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant attributed his delinquent debt to a period of 
time after his divorce when he was young and “made terrible financial decisions.” (Item 
4.) He has attempted to correct his mistakes since then. He no longer uses credit cards. 
(AE A.) 
 
  Applicant explained in his Answer that he made a “gross mistake” on the e-QIP 
by not disclosing the five debts. He denied that he intentionally failed to disclose the 
debts. (Item 4.) He attempted to complete it too quickly. He “assumed since the old 
credit cards were charge offs that they didn’t apply in this section. It was purely an 
oversight.” (AE A.) He knew the government would request a credit check. (Id.). He 
pointed out that he included information about a credit card in response to question 28 
and made a note about potential outstanding judgments in response to question 27. 
 
 Other than his assertions, Applicant submitted no character references or other 
evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable 
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
                                                          
1The first two SOR debts are owed to the same creditor. Applicant provided a Notice of Dismissal 
referencing Case No. 08-CVD-1677, and a Notice of Withdrawal of Motion to Compel referencing Case 
No. 08-CVD-988. (Item 4; 5.) The final outcome of these debts is unclear. 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The two potentially disqualifying conditions raised by Applicant’s financial 
delinquencies are AG & 19(a) an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;@ and AG & 
19(c) Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Based on two CBRs and his 
statements, Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing 
in 2005, and which he did not begin to address until 2009. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of those security concerns. The guideline 
includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated 
where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s five financial 
delinquencies arose in 2005 and at least three of them remain unresolved to date. 
Because the problems are ongoing and not isolated, there is a likelihood that that they 
will continue in the future, and do cast doubt about his judgment. Hence, this condition 
does not apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
stated that some of his financial problems arose after he divorced in 2004. He also 
admitted that he made poor decisions related to his finances, and did not offer any 
evidence that he attempted to act responsibly while the debt was accruing or after it 
accrued. This guideline marginally applies.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant did not present any evidence that 
he received credit counseling and/or that his financial problems are under control, as 
required under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@ He did not provide evidence that he paid, attempted to pay, or has a 
repayment plan for any debt. AG & 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Applicant provided evidence that he has legally disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b. That evidence triggers mitigation under AG & 20(e), which applies when “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
 
6 
 
 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” Although he asserted 
that the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are not his debts, he did not provide any 
evidence that he has disputed them or taken action to resolve them. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified one question on the 
e-QIP; to wit, he failed to disclose five debts that were more than 90 and 180 days 
delinquent under question 28. The government contended that those omissions may 
raise a security concern and be disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied that he intentionally omitted information about the 
delinquent debts. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the 
government has the burden of proving it.  An omission, standing alone, does not 
establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state 
of mind at the time the omission occurred. (See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004).) 
 
 Applicant disclosed a child support garnishment under question 27(b) and 
provided specific information about it. Although he answered “No” to questions 28(a) 
and (b), he provided information about an outstanding credit card debt under that 
section. He explained that his failure to disclose the five delinquent debts was a mistake 
and that he did not think that charged off debts were considered delinquent. Based on 
his explanations and the disclosure of adverse information under both question 27 and 
28, he demonstrated his intent to be truthful and to not intentionally withhold information 
about the debts; hence, the government did not establish a disqualifying condition as to 
 
7 
 
 
SOR ¶ 2(a). The omission of the information may be negligent, but it was not 
intentional. Hence, the evidence does not establish deliberate falsification. This 
Guideline is found in his favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 34 years old, married 
and has two children. He has successfully worked for his employer for 11 years, during 
which time he has received promotions and commendations. He candidly admitted that 
after his divorce in 2004, he mismanaged his finances, which lead to an accumulation of 
delinquent debt. He legally disputed approximately $16,077 of the $30,598 delinquent 
debt listed in the SOR, but has taken no action to resolve the remaining $14,521, 
despite receiving the SOR in July 2009 and the FORM at the end of September 2009. 
Although he and his new wife have sufficient money to manage their expenses and 
debts, he failed to establish a track record of resolving delinquent debts and maintaining 
financial responsibility, so recurrence of these financial concerns may be likely. The 
record contains insufficient other evidence about his character, trustworthiness, or 
reliability to mitigate these concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct, but did not 
mitigate all of the concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
