1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-11322
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-Qip) (SCA, GE 1) on August 18, 2008. On September 24, 2008, Applicant was
interviewed by an investigator of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
concerning overdue financial debts he had accumulated. In his interrogatory answers
dated March 6, 2009, Applicant checked “Yes,” that he agreed with and adopted the
investigator’s summary of the September 24, 2008, interview, and that it could be used
in evidence (GE 2). On June 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under
financial considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
2
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006.
Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on June 29,
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 31, 2009 for a hearing on September
16, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, five exhibits (GE I
through 5) were admitted in evidence without objection to support the government's
case. Applicant testified. The record remained open until September 30, 2009 (Tr. 47) to
allow Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. No evidence was
submitted. DOHA received the transcript on September 24, 2009. The record closed on
September 30, 2009.
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges financial considerations (Guideline F), based on two judgments
and ten debts totaling $163,873. The largest delinquent account is a foreclosed
mortgage. The other delinquent debts are credit cards, a telephone debt, a landlord-
tenant debt, department store debts, and a check cashing debt. Applicant admitted ¶¶
1.a., 1.b., 1.c., and 1.l. He denied ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.I, 1.j., and 1.k. Applicant
provided no documentation to support his denials.
Applicant is 35 years old. Following four months of unemployment, Applicant was
hired by a defense contractor in August 2008 at his current job as a lead technician. He
has held a security clearance since June 1994 (GE 1). He is married with no children. 
Financial Considerations
Applicant’s financial problems began in July 2007, after he and his former wife
purchased a house (GE 5 at 8). Around the time of purchase, Applicant testified that he
and his former wife had over a 700 credit score because they always paid their bills on
time (Tr. 43). A month after purchasing the house, he bought and installed a water
filtration system (GE 5). Two months after purchasing the house, he obtained a loan for
repairs to the house (Id.; Tr. 26). Shortly, after obtaining the loan, his former wife left
him. When she filed for divorce, he had to retain an attorney (Tr. 19). In April 2008, he
lost his job and was unemployed for four months (GE 1 at 12). The 12 accounts,
including the two judgments, became delinquent between October 2007 and August
2008. Applicant indicated he has been trying to sell the house since July 2008 (Tr. 29),
but he provided no documentation to support his testimony. 
The delinquent account in ¶ 1.a. represents a water purification system Applicant
purchased for the house that subsequently went into foreclosure (¶ 1.j.). The filtration
creditor filed a judgment for $6,779 in November 2008. The delinquent account in ¶ 1.b.
represents a loan Applicant obtained in September 2007 to renovate his house. The
creditor filed a judgment against Applicant in December 2008 for $8,305. 
3
At the hearing, Applicant’s reason for denying ¶ 1.e. was that he paid his landlord
extra money to allow Applicant’s pet to live in his apartment (Tr. 13-14). But, in his
interview in September 2008, he stated that he moved into an apartment even though
the carpet from the previous tenant had not been replaced. Because he needed
accommodations immediately, he agreed with the landlord to accept the apartment “as
is.” After he moved out of the apartment, a new landlord charged him for damage to the
apartment carpet. He informed the new landlord about his agreement with the old
landlord, but the agreement could not be located (Id.). 
¶ 1.i. is a deficiency balance of $8,354 for a vehicle that belonged to his wife.
According to Applicant, she was obligated to pay the debt under a divorce decree (Tr.
15). Applicant did not present the divorce decree to support his claim. In addition,
Applicant and his former wife signed the auto installment loan in a joint capacity (GE 5). 
Regarding ¶ 1.j., Applicant claimed he had mortgage insurance to cover the
foreclosure on his house. No documentation was presented (Tr. 15-17, 19).
The delinquent account identified in ¶ 1.l was caused by Applicant’s former
girlfriend who started using drugs in December 2006. Applicant indicated she cleared
out his checking account to support her habit (Tr. 39). He found out about the $736 debt
after two checks he wrote for groceries were returned for insufficient funds (Tr. 40-41).
Applicant provided restitution for both checks (Id.).
Applicant has had no financial counseling, and has not attempted to consolidate
payment of his debts in a debt plan (GE 2 at 5). He does not have a checking or savings
account, and does not use a bank (Tr. 30). 
On various occasions within the last year, Applicant testified that he called
several creditors, asking them whether they would reduce the delinquent balances or
formulate a payment plan, but has received no reply (Tr. 25). About a month before the
hearing, Applicant asked some attorneys about Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and wanted to
know whether filing a petition would reduce his chances of obtaining a security
clearance (Tr. 22-23). 
Whole Person Information
Applicant provided no character evidence about his job performance or his
reputation in the community where he lives.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). Each
guideline lists potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
used in evaluating an applicant's eligibility for access to classified information. These
4
guidelines are flexible rules of law that must take into consideration the complexities of
human behavior. 
The administrative judge's ultimate adjudicative goal is to reach a fair and
impartial decision that is based on commonsense. The decision should also include a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the "whole person
concept." Finally, the administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are sensible, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.l.14., the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.l.l5., the applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
¶ 18. The Concern. "Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts."
There are two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 that must be considered.
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) is applicable because of the
substantial amount of debt Applicant is unable to pay. AG ¶ 19(c) (a history not meeting
financial obligations) must also be considered due to Applicant’s history of not meeting
his obligations.  
The first four mitigating conditions are potentially applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
5
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment) must be removed from consideration
because the 12 debts fell delinquent in the last three years. Applicant’s failure to take
any kind of documented action raises continuing doubt about his reliability and
judgment. 
Applicant’s unemployment from April to August 2008, and his divorce, were
events beyond his control, and deserve consideration under the first prong of AG ¶
20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). But the
mitigating condition also requires the individual to act responsibly under the
circumstances. Applicant has been employed about a year. Yet, he has provided no
documented evidence of attempting to address the listed delinquencies. He receives
limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
Applicant has had no financial counseling as defined by AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control). He is familiar with
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, but he has taken no steps toward that course of action. AG ¶
20(c) does not apply as there is no indication Applicant’s indebtedness is being resolved
or is under control. Applicant receives no consideration under FC MC ¶ 20.d. (the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts) because of his lack of action in handling his overdue debts and judgments. The
financial guideline is found against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept 
I have examined the evidence with the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
my ultimate finding against Applicant under the financial guideline. I have also weighed
the circumstances within the context of nine variables known as the whole person
concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the administrative judge
should consider the following factors:
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant was 33 years old when he bought the water purification system and
applied for the loan to renovate his house. Buying the system and obtaining the loan
within months of purchasing his house indicates that more responsible decisions could
6
have been made before landing in such deep debt. Even though Applicant had a
favorable credit score before he purchased his house in July 2007, he still should have
evaluated the equally important issue of whether he could afford the purchase by
managing the additional costs of maintaining a home.
Applicant stated he tried several times to reduce the debt balances or establish
payment plans with the creditors. Regarding his largest debt, he said he had mortgage
insurance which would have extricated him from financial responsibility for the
mortgage. Failure to produce evidence of mortgage insurance or of contacting the
creditors, i.e., a log written by Applicant tracking his efforts to contact the creditors,
impeaches Applicant’s claims of attempting to deal with his indebtedness. With no
documentation and no evidence of financial counseling, Applicant has not met his
burden of demonstrating his security worthiness. The financial guideline is resolved
against him. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
                      
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
7
