  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11961 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had six charged off accounts or accounts placed for collection, which 
totaled in excess of $31,000. She is now current on her $23,000 student loan, is making 
payments on some of her accounts, and the car company agreed to settle their debt for 
$4,500. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under 
financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 16, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was received June 8, 2009, in which she 
requested a hearing. On July 15, 2009, I was assigned the case. On July 28, 2009, 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing, which was held on September 
2, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through C, 
which were admitted into evidence. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. Additional material was submitted in a timely manner. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted into the 
record as Ex. D through N. On September 14, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted the factual allegations, with 
explanations, in ¶ 1.a through ¶1.f. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are 
admitted as fact. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old administrative temporary contractor doing clerical work 
and data entry who has worked as a contractor since March 2009, and is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance. The director of her company states Applicant demonstrates 
professionalism, a strong work ethic, excellent multi-tasking skills, and has strong 
initiative. (Ex. I)  
 
 Applicant had three charged off accounts ($324, SOR ¶ 1.a; $109, SOR ¶ 1.b; 
and $126, SOR ¶ 1.c) with a telephone provider. The largest of these three accounts is 
her ex-husband’s cell phone account. (Tr. 28) On September 4, 2009, she made a $118 
payment, leaving a balance of $109 on the debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.b and SOR ¶ 1.c. 
(Ex. F) She is paying $50 per month on her ex-husband’s account. (Ex. M, Tr. 29, 40) 
She was indebted ($956) on a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.f) placed for collection. Her 
ex-husband had purchased a stereo and TV. (Tr. 54) In September 2009, Applicant 
made a $100 payment on this debt. (Ex. C) Applicant has arranged with the creditor to 
pay $100 each month by automatic debit until this debt is paid. (Ex. G) Applicant owes 
$23,158 on her student loan (SOR ¶ 1.d). (Ex. G) She is making $165 per month 
payments on this debt. (Ex. C, Tr. 46)  
 
 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 In May 2007, Applicant and her then husband separated. (Tr. 26) They had 
married in September 2006. Applicant has a three-year old daughter. The divorce 
decree (Ex. A) states there were no children of the marriage. Following the separation, 
her husband made a few payments to Applicant before ceasing all payments. In May 
2009, their divorce was final and Applicant remarried. The divorce decree did not 
include a property settlement or any child support obligation. Her current husband 
receives $334 disability each month. (Ex. H, Tr. 72)    
 
  In August 2007, Applicant lost her $60,000 a year job as an account executive at 
a mortgage company. (Tr. 26, 89, 102) She had been with the company since June 
2003. (Ex. B) She remained unemployed for a year, collecting unemployment 
compensation of $263 per week. (Tr. 90, 91) In order to limit her expenses, Applicant 
moved in with her mother. In October 2007, her car was repossessed. (Tr. 95) She had 
purchased the car for $17,564 with monthly payments of $293. Following repossession, 
the vehicle was sold with $7,183 remaining on the original obligation. In August 2009, 
the creditor offered to settle the debt for $4,500. (Ex. N)  
 
 In March 2009, Applicant began working for a temporary employment agency. 
She is paid $14 per hour. (Ex. H) With her limited income, Applicant intends to pay three 
of the debts first and then address the remainder. (Tr. 63) She intends to pay all her 
obligations. She intends to save up to make a lump sum payment on the car debt. 
Applicant has sought counseling from her mother-in-law who is an accountant. (Tr. 85)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s debts and their current status follows: 
 
 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
a Telephone provider. $324 This is her ex-husband’s phone bill on 
which she pays $50 monthly. 
 
b 
Telephone provider. 
 
 
$109 
 
Paying. Applicant paid $118 on this 
debt which has been combined with 
the following debt.  
 
c 
Telephone provider. 
 
$126 
 
This debt is with the same provider 
listed above. 
 
d 
Collection service collecting on 
her student loan.  
$23,158 Applicant has arranged to pay $165 
per month on this debt. She has 
started her payments. 
e Repossessed vehicle. 
 
$7,183 
 
The creditor has agreed to settle this 
matter for $4,500. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
 f Credit card collection 
account. 
$956 Applicant has arranged to pay $100 per 
month by automatic debit on this debt. 
Payment has commenced. 
 Total debt listed in SOR $31,856  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant had six charged off accounts or accounts placed for collection, 
which totaled in excess of $31,000. Applicant admits the debts. Disqualifying Conditions 
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant had a good job as an account executive at a mortgage company 
paying $60,000 per year. She was unemployed for a year collecting $263 per week 
unemployment compensation. Her car was repossessed. She now works for a 
temporary employment agency making $14 per hour. With her limited income she has 
begun to repay her debts.  
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because she 
did not resolve all of her delinquent SOR debts through payment, established payment 
plans or disputes. Her delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the 
Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 
2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
AG & 20(b) applies. Applicant experienced both separation and divorce along 
with the financial burden associated with each. Additionally, she lost her job in the 
mortgage industry and was unemployed for a year causing an adverse financial impact. 
These are factors beyond her control. She acted reasonably to limit her financial 
problems by moving in with her mother to save expenses.  
 
The Appeal Board’s discussion of AG ¶ 20(b) in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) clarifies the applicability of this mitigating condition when an 
Applicant is unable to make substantial progress on delinquent debts after 
circumstances outside an applicant’s control cause delinquent debt. In ISCR Case No. 
08-06567 (A.J. July 27, 2009), the applicant had obtained financial counseling, 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
developed a repayment plan, and took reasonable actions to effectuate his repayment 
plan. Id. at 3. The Appeal Board found: 
 
. . . an applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for 
paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is 
that an applicant act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a 
reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
Once Applicant returned to full-time employment in March 2009, she worked to 
pay her creditors.2 For example, she paid her student loan and the telecommunications 
debts. She has not made any payments to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.e, but is saving in 
order to be able to accept the creditor’s offer and make a lump sum payment. She has 
contacted all of her SOR creditors and knows what she must do to resolve her debts. 
Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances. There are clear indications 
that her financial problem is being resolved or is under control. She has established her 
financial responsibility.  
 
Applicant has received financial advice and counseling from her mother-in-law, 
an accountant. AG & 20(c) applies. She has reached agreement and started making 
payments on all but the repossession debt.  
 
The loss of her $60,000 a year job was not only an unexpected event, but an 
event which under such circumstances is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. She was not living 
beyond her means. The debts were three phone accounts, her student loan, a vehicle 
repossession, and less than $1,000 owed on a credit card. She has initiated a good- 
good faith3 to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG & 20(d) partially 
applies. 
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether the Applicant maintained contact with his or her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep debts current. 
 
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
 
8 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
The creditor has offered to settle the car debt for $4,500. With her limited amount 
of available income, Applicant has chosen to address her other debts first. She intends 
to save money to allow her to make a lump-sum payment on this debt. This sole 
remaining debt does not raise concern about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is paying the majority of 
her debts. She is saving money to accept an offer on the remaining obligation. Her 
debts cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not 
simply whether all her debts are paid or are being paid—it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).)  
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
The debts incurred were not the type that indicates poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Money was not spent 
frivolously. The debts were incurred when she had a $60,000 job. Viewed in that 
context, her debts are not unreasonable obligations. She owed a $1,000 credit card 
debt and less than $500 for telephone services. The largest of her debts was not 
incurred on luxuries, but was her student loan. The repossession of her car would not 
have occurred absent the loss of her job.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Guideline F, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1. f:  For Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
10 
 
 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
