  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11995 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to owe approximately 24 accounts that have been 
charged-off or placed for collection, which total approximately $13,000. She admits 
owing 11 debts, which total approximately $7,700. The delinquent debts remain unpaid. 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for an 
industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
   1
Reasons (SOR) on August 11, 2009, detailing security concerns under guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
  
 On September 19, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated December 10, 2009. The FORM 
contained 11 attachments. On December 16, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
On January 15, 2010, Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel 
did not object to the response. Applicant's response was admitted into the record. On 
January 29, 2010, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted the factual allegations, with 
explanations, in ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.o, 1.q, 1.r, 1.t, 1.u. and 1.w. These eleven 
debts total $7,755. She denied the remaining factual allegations. Applicant’s admissions 
to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, 
pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old security officer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2008, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant asserts her financial problems started in 1993 when she was taking 
care of her two daughters2, her sick mother, and stepfather. Her stepfather died in 2000 
after a four-year illness. In 2000, Applicant was laid-off from her job at a counseling 
center. In September 2003, she was unemployed for three months following her 
relocation to a new city. From May 2003 through July 2008, her pay was $9 per hour. In 
June 2008, she obtained her current job which pays $12 per hour.  
 
 In December 2008, she suffered a heart attack and her medications are 
expensive. Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) (Items 10 and 11) list six medical 
debts in SOR paragraphs: 1.a ($42), 1.b ($36), 1.c ($34), 1.d ($900), 1.f ($371), and 1.x 
($647).  
 
 Applicant denies owing a $1,173 telephone debt (SOR ¶ 1.q), which a collection 
agency is attempting to collect. Applicant’s cell phone was stolen in 2003. She reported 
the theft to the service provider and they said they would investigate the matter. 
Applicant then forgot about the matter. As of September 2008, Applicant had been 
advised she was $1,349 delinquent on the account. (Item 8) 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
2 Her daughters are now age 25 and 31.  
   2
 In March 2009, Applicant contacted a debt solution company. (Item 9) The plan 
lists $10 per month payments on each of eight debts, which totaled $2,322, for a total 
monthly payment of $80. Those SOR debts are: 1.c ($34), 1.f ($371), 1.j ($189), 1.k 
($373), 1.n ($751), 1.o ($236), 1.q ($48), and 1.r ($320). Applicant failed to show she 
made any payments to the debt solution company. 
  
 In September 2009, Applicant again contacted the debt solution company. The 
arrangement listed four of the SOR debts and two duplicate accounts, which totaled 
$1,723. Those SOR four debts are: 1.f ($371), 1.j ($189), 1.o ($236), and 1.r ($320). 
The two duplicate accounts are: 1.f ($371) and 1.o ($236). Applicant did not explain why 
the duplicate accounts were listed as debts to be paid. The agreement required 
Applicant to pay the debt solutions company $75 monthly on these debts.  
 
 As of March 25, 2009, the creditor of the student loan was holding a postdated 
check in the amount of $64. (Item 9) There is no evidence this check was honored or 
that any additional payment was made on this loan. Applicant asserts, but failed to 
provide documentation, that she is paying $64 monthly on her student loans. The SOR 
lists two student loan debts: 1.l ($38) and 1.w ($4,973).  
 
Applicant has cut back on or eliminated things in order to pay her bills. She did 
not learn she was divorced until 1997 or 1998, when her ex-husband and he told her he 
had divorced her years earlier. (Answer to FORM) 
 
In September 2008, Applicant was questioned about her unpaid debt during a 
personal interview. (Item 8) In March 2009 and May 2009, Applicant answered 
interrogatories concerning her unpaid debt. In March 2009, a debt of $19.18 was paid 
by an offset from her state income tax refund. (Answer to SOR) Applicant did not 
indicate which SOR debt related to this payment. Additionally, a $35.74 check was sent 
to another creditor not listed in the SOR. These are the only documented payments 
presented. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
   3
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
   4
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems, by her admission, which started in 1993. Seven of Applicant’s debts were 
approximately $100 or less. Throughout this process, she had admitted responsibility for 
eleven delinquent debs, totaling about $7,700. She has provided insufficient 
documentation to show significant progress resolving her debts. The government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems started in 1993, but continue to 
remain a problem. She has numerous delinquent debts, some less than $100 each, that 
   5
remain unpaid. The debt was not incurred under unusual circumstances. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant was divorced sometime during the 1990s and was 
unemployed for three months in 2003. These are certainly problems largely beyond her 
control, however the divorce occurred more than ten years ago and the unemployment 
more than six years ago. Her mother had been ill, and in December 2008, Applicant had 
a heart attack. Again, these are conditions beyond her control. The financial impact of 
her mother’s illness and her heart attack is unknown except for her comment that her 
medication is rather expensive. AG & 20(b) has limited applicability. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) there is no indication that Applicant has received counseling or 
that her financial problems are under control. Under AG & 20(d), there is no showing 
Applicant has paid any of the SOR debts or entered into an agreement making payment 
on her debts. In March 2009, she contacted a debt management company, but there is 
no evidence she made any payments to her creditors as a result of that contact. In 
September 2009, she again contacted the company, but she has not provided any 
evidence she has made payments following that contact. She did provide evidence that 
in March 2009, the creditor holding her student loan obligation was in possession of a 
$64 postdated check. There is no evidence of any additional payment to that creditor. 
AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) do not apply. 
 
Applicant has denied some of the debts. Specifically, she says her cell phone 
was stolen in 2003 and she informed the service provider of the theft. They investigated 
and Applicant owes the money. For AG & 20(e) to apply not only is there a need for a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debts, but she must provide 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. Simply stating the debt is not owed is insufficient for this mitigating 
factor to apply.  
 
The debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.u ($489) and 1.v ($574) are duplicated debts. Not 
only are both obligations owed to the same creditor, although the account numbers 
differ, the payment history on these two debts is identical. Applicant admits the one 
obligation and denies the other. The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.l ($38) is a student loan, 
which would be included in the larger $4,973 student loan amount (SOR ¶ 1.l). 
Additionally, the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.l ($189) is a collection company collecting for the 
telephone company listed in SOR ¶ 1.l ($189). I find the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.l, 
and 1.v to be duplicate debts. I find for Applicant as to these three debts. Her unpaid 
debt raises concerns about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
   6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. It is noted that six of the debts were 
for medical treatment. 
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am 
unable to evaluate her demeanor, appearance, or form a positive determination as to 
her truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and 
honest. Even if I found for her in these matters, there is no evidence of payment on the 
delinquent debts.  
 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid or are being 
paid, which they are not—it is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about 
her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) The amount of debt is not 
large. The amount alleged was $13,000 and she admits to owing $7,700. However, 
none of the delinquent debt has been paid. It is noted that seven of the debts, 
approximately one-third of the total number of her debts, are for debts of less than $100 
each. Even the small debts have not been addressed.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. Should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
   7
   8
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a -1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m- 1.u:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.v:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.w and 1.x: Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
