 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11645 
 SSN:  ) 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns but has not mitigated Financial 
Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
E and F, Personal Conduct and Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant received a copy of the SOR on June 24, 2009. He answered the SOR 
on July 24, 2009, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to another administrative judge on September 28, 2009, and reassigned 
to me on September 30, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 9, 2009, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 9, 2009. The government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which were received without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through L, which were 
received without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to 
submit additional information. Applicant submitted documents, which were marked AE 
M through S and admitted without objection.1 Department Counsel’s memorandum is 
marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 22, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
retain his security clearance, which he has held since 1979. Except for a period when 
he was laid-off, he has worked for his current employer, or a predecessor company, 
since 1978. He attended college for several years but did not obtain a degree. He has 
been married since 1978. He and his wife have two children, ages 27 and 25.2  
 
 Applicant has experienced financial difficulties for many years. He and his wife 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1984, and their debts were discharged in 1985. They filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1988. The bankruptcy was dismissed in 1989, after he was 
unable to maintain the payments to the trustee. They filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
1998, and their debts were discharged the same year. They filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
in September 2003. The bankruptcy was dismissed in October 2004, for failure to make 
the required payments to the plan. Applicant testified that they voluntarily withdrew from 
the Chapter 13 bankruptcy because he wanted to purchase a home, and he did not 
know if he would be permitted to do so while subject to the bankruptcy court’s 
jurisdiction. He stated that he planned on paying the debts on his own.3 
 
 Applicant attributed the 1984 bankruptcy to a failed business. He stated his wife 
stopped working in 1986, which placed a strain on their finances and led to the Chapter 
13 bankruptcy in 1988. He was laid-off from his job for a year in 1988 to 1989, and 
                                                          
1 AE S is a copy of a credit report that Applicant meant to introduce at his hearing, but it was 
copied incorrectly. Department Counsel submitted a copy after the hearing along with Applicant’s exhibits. 
I have admitted the exhibit because it is in accordance with Applicant’s original plans. 
 
2 Tr. at 27-28, 70-71; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 43-44, 56-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4-7. 
 
 
3 
 
stopped paying into his Chapter 13 plan. He admitted in a 1990 statement that he 
“mismanage[d] money,” and he “sometimes spen[t] the money allocated for bills on 
other expenses.”4  
 
 Applicant stated that his 1998 Chapter 7 bankruptcy resulted from unpaid 
medical expenses. Additionally, he purchased a new car believing one of their older 
cars was sold, but the buyer backed out of the purchase, leaving him with three car loan 
payments. He also had “too many credit card bills.” He admitted in a September 1998 
statement that he and his wife “also had gotten into a very bad habit in that we did not 
balance the bank statements and we were not living within a budget.”5 He wrote in that 
1998 statement: 
 
Since the bankruptcy we now have a positive cash flow at the end of the 
month which we try to put away some of this every month so that we 
always have a reserve. We also pay cash for everything and do not plan 
to change that, with the exception of a major purchase such as a car or a 
house. We have been very careful since the bankruptcy to balance the 
bank statement every month and watch what we spend so that we are 
always within budget. We do not want to repeat the mistakes that we 
made to date.6 
 
 Applicant attributed the 2003 bankruptcy to changes in his employer’s policies on 
bonuses and reimbursing car expenses, which caused his income to decrease about 
$1,000 per month.7 In a November 2003 statement, he wrote: 
 
To the best of my knowledge, the accounts on my current bankruptcy are 
closed and I am not going to reopen them. I am not going to secure any 
additional credit. I understand it is my responsibility to pay my bills and 
debts. However, my income was reduced through no fault of my own. I am 
making an earnest effort to live within my means.8  
 
 In addition to his four bankruptcies, the SOR alleges seven delinquent debts, with 
balances totaling $16,932. Applicant denied owing all the debts at the time of his 
response, with the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.i, which he 
partially admitted. He also provided explanations about the debts. All of the debts are 
listed on one or more of the credit reports obtained in June 2008, December 2008, 
March 2009, and December 2009.9 Specific debts are addressed below.  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 56-58; GE 6. 
 
5 GE 5. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Tr. at 56-57; GE 4. 
 
8 GE 4. 
 
9 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8-11. 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.e alleges a delinquent debt of $14,114 to a collection company for the 
deficiency owed on an auto loan after the vehicle was repossessed in about 2004. In 
August 2009, Applicant agreed to settle the debt for $7,276 through monthly payments 
of $150. He made the first four payments. He told the company that he would attempt to 
increase the payments as his financial situation improves.10 
 
 Applicant paid the $52 delinquent medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.f on July 6, 
2009. He settled the delinquent debt of $644 to a collection company on behalf of a 
women’s-clothing catalog/internet company on July 30, 2009. This debt was alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2.g. He paid delinquent debts of $72 and $265 owed to the same credit card 
company on August 10, 2009. The $72 debt was alleged in SOR ¶ 2.h. The $265 debt 
was not alleged in the SOR.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.i alleges a delinquent debt of $534 to a collection company for medical 
expenses. Applicant contacted the collection company and discovered that it was not 
his debt. The debt was deleted from his credit report.12 
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debt of $1,180 to a collection company on 
behalf of a check cashing/loan company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.j. Applicant stated that 
the debt was removed from his credit report. He was asked if he originally owed the 
creditor. He responded: 
 
That was one that I had that was part of the bankruptcy, but I couldn’t find 
any documentation that I paid it, but when I contacted them that was - - 
again, it was not me so they removed it from the credit [report].13 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation on August 30, 2008, by an 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He was asked about his 
finances and the delinquent debts that were listed on the credit report. A signed 
statement was not taken, but the interview was summarized in a report of investigation 
(ROI). DOHA sent the ROI to Applicant in an interrogatory and asked him if the ROI 
accurately reflected the information he provided to the investigator. He responded that it 
did not, and he provided almost two pages of corrections. Applicant discussed the 
$1,180 debt with the investigator. He stated that before his 2003 bankruptcy, he went to 
the creditor to obtain a loan to pay his debts. He did not pay the loan company back 
because he did not have the funds. He contacted the collection company in 2004, in 
order to make payment arrangements. The company wanted payment in full, which he 
was not able to do. He indicated that the debt had not been paid. In the corrections to 
the ROI submitted in response to DOHA interrogatories on March 3, 2009, Applicant did 
not correct any of the information in the ROI about this debt. He certified that, subject to 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 44-46, 61-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 8-11; AE H, L. 
 
11 Tr. at 63-65, 69-70; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, I, K. 
 
12 Tr. at 66-67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8-11; AE S. 
 
13 Tr. at 67. 
 
 
5 
 
the corrections he made, the ROI accurately summarized his interview. This debt is 
listed by Experian on the joint credit report obtained in June 2008. It is not listed on the 
three Equifax credit reports from December 2008, March 2009, and December 2009, or 
the October 2009 credit report submitted by Applicant.14 
  
 SOR ¶ 2.k alleges a delinquent debt of $336 owed to a city in a different state 
than where Applicant lives. The debt was for an unpaid parking ticket issued in February 
2006. Applicant’s son received the ticket after he borrowed Applicant’s truck. Applicant 
contacted the city in 2006, and informed them that his son was driving the vehicle when 
the ticket was issued. The city informed Applicant that because he was the registered 
owner of the vehicle, he was liable for the ticket. Applicant did not pay the ticket for 
several years because he did not feel responsible for the citation. He told the OPM 
investigator in August 2008, that he would contact his son to pay the ticket. Applicant 
paid the citation on July 31, 2009, after he received the SOR.15  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as required for his bankruptcy in 2003. 
He has a detailed budget. He stated the counseling has helped him manage his 
finances, live within his budget, and not incur new delinquent debt. He obtained a 15-
year mortgage when he purchased his home. It costs him about $400 more per month 
than a 30-year mortgage, but it will save him more than $200,000 in interest over the life 
of the mortgage. He owns a 2005 model car for which he pays $536 per month to the 
creditor. When he has completed paying that loan, he plans on paying an extra $500 
per month to the auto loan for his wife’s vehicle, so that loan will be paid early.16 
 
 Applicant’s company issued him a corporate credit card. The company policy 
limited the card to business-related expenses only. Applicant used the card for personal 
purchases from about 2000, through when the company switched to a different credit 
card in late 2007. Applicant stated that he thought the card could be used for personal 
purposes as long as the balance was paid. He would submit his monthly business 
expenses to his company, and the company would pay the credit card company directly. 
The bills were mailed to Applicant. He would estimate what he spent for personal 
purchases and pay that amount. The balance on the account grew over the years. By 
the time the company switched to another card, his personal balance had grown to 
more than $2,000. Applicant received the new corporate card in late 2007. The original 
card was paid in full with payments of $4,200 on February 18, 2008, and $2,281 on 
March 3, 2008. Applicant’s company placed him on unpaid leave for one week; his 
supervisor was required to monitor his corporate card for six months; and he had to 
attend ethics classes. There is no indication of any recurrence of this type of behavior.17 
 
                                                          
14 GE 2, 8-11; AE S. 
 
15 Tr. at 68-69; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE J. 
 
16 Tr. at 43-47, 57-61, 71; AE G. 
 
17 Tr. at 29-43, 48-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE E, F, M-P. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s security manager testified favorably about his job performance, 
honesty, and trustworthiness. He has been recognized by his company and the U.S. 
military with numerous awards and commendatory materials. Character letters from 
supervisors and managers attest to his work performance, respect for security rules and 
regulations, professionalism, integrity, and judgment. His character references 
recommend him for a security clearance.18  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
                                                          
18 Tr. at 75-77; AE B-F, Q. 
 
7 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant violated his company’s policy by using his corporate credit card for 
personal purchases from about 2000 to 2007. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) are applicable as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
8 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant accepted responsibility for his actions. He was disciplined by his 
company, received ethics training, and there is no evidence of any recurrence of that 
behavior. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) are applicable. Personal Conduct security concerns 
have been mitigated.19 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
                                                          
19 While I found the Personal Conduct security concerns were mitigated, the information is 
relevant in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation; in the application of Financial Considerations 
mitigating conditions; and in evaluating the “whole person.” 
 
9 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant filed bankruptcy in 1984, 1988, 1998, and 2003. AG ¶ 20(a) would be 
applicable to those actions but for the fact that he still has not paid all the delinquent 
debt from his 2003 bankruptcy. I am unable to find that Applicant’s financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributed the 1984 bankruptcy to a failed business. His wife stopped 
working in 1986, and he was laid-off from his job for a year in about 1988. He had 
unpaid medical expenses, a buyer reneged on an offer to buy his car, and his company 
changed its bonus and auto reimbursement policies, resulting in a substantial loss of 
income. All of these incidents could potentially qualify as conditions that were outside 
his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant also admitted that he mismanaged 
money, spent the money allocated for bills on other expenses, had too many credit card 
bills, did not balance his bank statements, did not live within a budget, and used his 
corporate credit card for personal purchases. Despite twice having his debts discharged 
in bankruptcy, he continued to accrue delinquent debts. I do not find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
10 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as part of his bankruptcy. He paid the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.f, 2.g, 2.h, and 2.k. He also paid a $265 debt that was not 
alleged in the SOR. The total amount owed on those five debts was $1,369. All of the 
debts were paid in July and August 2009, after he received the SOR. AG ¶ 20(d) is 
applicable to those debts. He began making $150 monthly payments in August 2009, to 
settle the $14,114 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.e for $7,276. The four payments to that 
creditor are not yet sufficient to qualify as a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his other 
debts.20 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to his other debts. Applicant has not established 
that the problem is being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. 
 
 Applicant successfully disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.i. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to that debt. He denied owing the $1,180 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.j. He 
testified that the debt was removed from his credit report because “it was not [him].” He 
admitted to the OPM investigator that he obtained a loan from that creditor before his 
2003 bankruptcy, and he did not pay it. Accounts are removed from credit reports for 
many reasons unrelated to the validity of the debt. I find that Applicant failed to establish 
that he is not responsible for this debt. The debt is unpaid. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable 
to that debt.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
20 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
11 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems. He filed bankruptcy on four 
occasions, and twice had his debts discharged. He voluntarily withdrew from his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy because he wanted to purchase a home, and he did not know if 
he would be permitted to do so while subject to the bankruptcy court’s jurisdiction. He 
purchased a home and obtained a 15-year mortgage. He stated that he planned on 
paying the debts on his own. He paid five debts totaling $1,369 and began paying $150 
per month to settle a $14,114 debt for $7,276 after he received the SOR. He denied 
responsibility for a debt because it was removed from his credit report, when that debt is 
clearly his. He wrote in a September 1998 statement that he and his wife had a positive 
cash flow at the end of the month, they paid cash for everything, and they did not want 
to repeat the mistakes that led to their bankruptcies. That is similar to what he 
presented at his hearing. About two years after that statement, Applicant began using 
his corporate credit card for personal purchases. About five years later, he filed Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. Two debts remain unpaid. I considered Applicant’s long and 
commendable work history and his favorable character evidence. However, his finances 
continue to be a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns but has not mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.f-2.i:  For Applicant 
 
12 
 
Subparagraph 2.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
