 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04323 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on June 24, 2007. On August 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 21, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case 
be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on October 19, 2009.  The FORM was forwarded to Applicant and 
Applicant received the FORM on October 26, 2009. He had 30 days from receipt of the 
FORM to submit any additional material. He did not respond. The FORM was forwarded 
to the hearing office on January 7, 2010, and assigned to me on January 8, 2010. 
 
2 
 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 21, 2009, Applicant admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.g, and 
2.a. (Item 5)  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old production test technician employed with a Department 
of Defense contractor seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with the 
defense contractor since May 2007. He is married and has two adult children. (Item 6)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed several financial issues. Applicant 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 1995. His debts were discharged in July 1995. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 5) On July 21, 2004, Appellant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed on August 29, 2006, because he was unable to 
make the monthly payments. (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5, section 27; Item 7 at 2; Item 9; Item 10 
at 4) 
 
Applicant owes back taxes to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). In February 
2004, the IRS filed a tax lien in the amount of $91,085 for taxes owed for tax years 
1996--2000. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5, section 27; Item 7; Item 8; Item 9 at 1; Item 10 at 4; 
Item 11 at 1). In March 2008, the IRS filed a federal tax lien in the amount of $7,534. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 11 at 1). The IRS also filed a federal tax lien in the amount of $28,096 
that same month. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 11 at 1) 
 
Applicant does not believe the federal or state governments have the right to tax 
his earnings. He has no intentions of paying the taxes owed to the federal government 
and has no intention to file tax returns in the future. (Item 7)  
 
The record evidence contains no information about Applicant’s current financial 
situation. There is no information in the record regarding Applicant’s work performance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
3 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
4 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. The following Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 
apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
FC DC &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); 
 
FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations); 
 
FC DC ¶ 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust); and 
 
FC DC ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same).  
 
Applicant has three federal tax liens filed against him, totaling $126,715.  He has 
no intention of paying his federal taxes and does not intend to file federal income taxes 
in the future. His two bankruptcies reveal that Applicant has had a history of financial 
irresponsibility.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of the mitigating conditions apply in 
Applicant’s case. He is a tax protester and refuses to pay his federal income taxes. He 
has no legal basis for refusing to pay his taxes. The concern under financial 
considerations is not mitigated.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant’s refusal to file his 
federal income tax returns and pay income taxes indicates questionable judgment and 
an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Individuals entrusted with our 
nation’s secrets are required to fulfill their duties as U.S. citizens. One of the utmost 
important duties of a U.S. citizen is to file returns, and pay federal income taxes. 
Applicant’s refusal to do so raises questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.   
 
 
5 
 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply under Guideline E. Guideline E is found 
against Applicant.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided no information 
about his work performance. His tax debts remain unresolved. Applicant’s past history 
of financial irresponsibility, his refusal to pay his tax debts, and his expressed intent that 
he will not file federal income tax returns in the future raise questions about his 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
