1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02753
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern generated by his criminal
conduct and financial problems. Clearance is denied.
On August 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines J, Criminal Conduct, and F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant answered the SOR on September 10, 2009, admitted all of the
allegations except SOR subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b, and requested a hearing. The case
was assigned to me on September 28, 2009. On November 25, 2009, a notice of
hearing was issued scheduling the case for December 9, 2009. The hearing was
2
conducted as scheduled. I received eight government exhibits, identified as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, and the testimony of two Applicant witnesses. At
the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open at Applicant’s request to allow him
to submit exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted seven exhibits that I received
as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G. DOHA received the transcript on December 16,
2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 36-year-old man with two children, ages 15 and 13. The oldest
child is from a previous relationship, and the youngest child is from his marriage, which
ended in divorce after 12 years in 2006. Both mothers have physical custody of their
respective children (Tr. 36).
Applicant finished high school in 1992 and has earned one year of college credit
over the years (Tr. 24; AE 1 at 2). He served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1992
through 2000. While in the Marines, he served honorably earning a Certificate of
Commendation in 1994, a Certificate of Good Conduct in 1995, a Navy and Marine
Corps Achievement Medal in 1997, and a Certificate of Good Conduct in 1998 (GE F at
1 through 4). 
Since leaving the Marines, Applicant has worked for a defense contractor as an
engineer (Tr. 27). His duties include testing communications systems and radar (Tr. 27).
He is well respected on the job. According to a coworker, data used to conduct tests is
sometimes contaminated because of unforeseen circumstances (AE E). Rather than
informing supervisors of the problem and repeating the testing, some employees,
motivated by fear of reprisal have used the contaminated data (Id.). Applicant, however,
has always acted appropriately by informing his supervisor and repeated the testing
(Id.).
In 1990, when Applicant was 17, went on a joyride with a friend who had stolen a
car (Tr. 28). Later, the friend, an adult, was apprehended by the police and accused
Applicant of stealing the car. Applicant was then charged in juvenile court with grand
theft of a motor vehicle (Answer). He pleaded guilty and the court withheld adjudication,
placing him in a community service program (Answer; Tr. 41). Applicant successfully
completed the program. 
In May 1995, Applicant and his then wife engaged in a public, heated argument
that turned physical, leading to Applicant’s arrest (GE 7). Applicant was not awarded
nonjudicial punishment. Instead, his supervisor, a first sergeant, restricted him to his
barracks for two weeks (Tr. 43, 67). 
In 2005, Applicant and his wife separated. Later that year, Applicant’s wife
erroneously sent him a sexually suggestive text message that was intended for another
man (GE 3 at 6). Enraged, Applicant drove to his wife’s home to confront her (Id. at 7).
After a friend of his wife answered the door and refused to allow him to enter, Applicant
The SOR does not allege any delinquent credit card accounts.1
3
kicked the door open, then left the home (Id.). Later, Applicant was charged with
entering property with intent to damage, and destruction of property (Id.). Also, the court
entered a 15-day protective order (Tr. 47). The protective order expired without incident,
and the court subsequently null prossed the charges (Answer). Also, Applicant
voluntarily completed anger management classes, which he successfully completed (Tr.
70; AE G).
Applicant now lives with his new girlfriend and her child (Tr. 87). According to his
girlfriend, Applicant and his ex-wife do a great job coordinating visitation and ensuring
their child has “what he needs” (Tr. 88). According to Applicant’s ex-wife, he is “a man
of great integrity, and is extremely dedicated to his children, family, and work” (AE E).
In 2007, Applicant, then 34 years old, began dating his next door neighbor’s
daughter (Tr. 31). She was 16 years old at the time. Applicant testified that he thought
she was 18 years old because of her “physical attributes” (Tr. 50). He contends no
sexual intercourse occurred, and that the relationship was limited to foreplay and the
exchange of sexually suggestive text messages (Tr. 50). 
Later, Applicant was arrested and charged with consensual sexual intercourse
with a child, age 15 or older (GE 5; Tr. 31). He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to six
months in jail with five months suspended (Answer).
One evening in February 2008, Applicant allowed his adult nephew who was
living with him to borrow his car (Tr. 55). The next morning, Applicant drove it to work
(Tr. 56). That afternoon, Applicant’s nephew called him and told him he left something in
the trunk (Tr. 56). Applicant assumed it was marijuana (Tr. 58). He did not dispose of it
or notify the police. Instead, Applicant left the marijuana in the trunk with the intention of
returning it to his nephew (Tr. 58). Later, while driving home from work, a highway
patrolman stopped Applicant for driving with tinted windows and smelled marijuana (Tr.
57). Applicant then told the officer about the marijuana in the trunk. The officer searched
the trunk, discovered approximately one ounce of marijuana, and arrested Applicant,
charging him with possession of marijuana. Applicant pleaded no contest, and was
sentenced to 30 days (suspended), and fined $141 (Answer at 2). Also, his driver’s
license was restricted for six months (Tr. 58).
At or about the time Applicant was arrested, his adjustable rate mortgage loan
increased, leading to a $300 increase in the monthly payment (GE 3 at 11). After the
marijuana-related arrest, Applicant evicted his nephew from the home. Applicant then
discovered that his nephew had opened multiple credit accounts in his name and had
charged approximately $7,000 on them  (Tr. 35). These problems, combined with the1
legal fees associated with the 2007 and 2008 arrests, caused Applicant to fall behind on
his mortgage. (Tr. 31, 35). 
4
Applicant then began making partial mortgage payments (GE 3 at 11). Also, he
attempted to renegotiate the loan. In August 2008, the mortgagee rejected his
renegotiation attempts and informed him that it would accept no further partial mortgage
payments (Id.). In October 2008, Applicant contacted a loan modification company (Id.).
Its efforts were unsuccessful. In January 2009, Applicant contacted another loan
modification company. Its efforts were also unsuccessful (Id.). 
In April 2009, the mortgagee foreclosed on Applicant’s home (Id). The balance of
the mortgage was $281,000 (SOR subparagraph 1.b). Since the issuance of the SOR,
the mortgagee short sold the home (Tr. 33). Applicant now owes approximately
$27,000, the difference between the short-sale price and the amount he owed (AE B).
Applicant wants to negotiate a payment plan, but the mortgagee wants the entire
balance in a lump sum, which he is unable to pay. In January 2010, approximately three
weeks after the hearing, Applicant wrote the mortgagee, again offering to begin
satisfying the deficiency through a payment plan (Id.). He enclosed a $200 check. It is
unknown from the record whether the mortgagee cashed the check.
The SOR lists two other delinquencies collectively less than $200. SOR
subparagraph 1.a is a phone bill for $58. Applicant contacted the phone company’s
billing department to dispute the bill (AE C). It had no record of the account, and
forwarded Applicant’s dispute to the credit reporting department to remove it from his
record (Id.).
SOR subparagraph 1.c is an allegedly delinquent insurance payment for $127.
Applicant disputes this bill contending that he has been using this insurance provider for
the past five years, and has never been informed of a delinquency (GE 3 at 10).
Applicant contacted the insurance company. It conducted an extensive record search
and confirmed that Applicant had no outstanding indebtedness (AE C). 
Applicant maintains a budget (AE D). He has approximately $250 of monthly
after-expense income (AE D at 2).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Moreover, “by its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations”
(Id.).
Applicant’s 18-year history of criminal conduct triggers the application of AG ¶
31(a), “. . . multiple lesser offenses.” Applicant’s car theft charge occurred before he
joined the Marines when he was a juvenile, and he successfully completed community
service, as ordered. Applicant was not criminally charged with domestic
disturbance/assault, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. I resolve SOR
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b for Applicant. 
Applicant’s behavior that lead to his 2005 domestic-related arrest, as listed in
SOR subparagraph 1.c, was precipitated by an unusual circumstance - receiving a
sexually explicit text message from his wife intended for another man. However, this
does not mitigate the behavior. Nevertheless, because Applicant is now divorced,
maintains a healthy relationship with his ex-wife, and has another girlfriend, any
domestic-related criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. I resolve SOR subparagraph 1.c
in Applicant’s favor.
I remain concerned about the 2007 and 2008 criminal conduct. Applicant’s
decision to become intimately involved with the teenage daughter of his next door
neighbor represents an unacceptable lapse in judgment regardless of whether she was
16, or 18, as Applicant believed. Applicant demonstrated a similar judgment lapse when
he decided to return the marijuana his nephew had left in the trunk of his car rather than
notifying the police or throwing it away.
Applicant has a good employment record and deserves credit for repairing his
relationship with his ex-wife, the physical custodian of one of his children. The mitigating
condition set forth in AG ¶ 32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation;
including, but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
6
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement,” applies partially. However, it is not sufficient to
outweigh the recency of the two aforementioned episodes of criminal conduct. Applicant
has not mitigated the Criminal Conduct security concern.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). In early 2008, Applicant fell behind on his mortgage payments, leading to the
foreclosure of his home the following year. Although the mortgagee short sold the
home, Applicant owes a deficiency of approximately $27,000. In addition, the SOR
alleges a delinquent phone bill and a delinquency owed to a car insurance company
collectively less than $200. AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
Applicant successfully disputed the two minor bills and provided supporting
documentation. AG ¶ 19(e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue,” applies. I resolve SOR subparagraphs 2.a and 2.c in
Applicant’s favor.
Applicant fell behind on his mortgage, in part, because the monthly payment
spiked at or about the same time his nephew charged $7,000 of purchases on credit
cards opened in Applicant’s name without his knowledge. These factors potentially
trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the business
downturn were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” The legal fees Applicant incurred related to his criminal
conduct also contributed to his financial difficulties. Under these circumstances, I
decline to apply AG ¶ 20(b).
In the 14 months preceding the foreclosure of Applicant’s home, he made partial
mortgage payments while unsuccessfully attempting to negotiate a loan modification.
Since the mortgagee foreclosed on the home, Applicant has organized a budget, and
sent a $200 payment to the mortgagee along with a proposed payment plan. AG ¶
20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” applies.
It is unknown from the record whether the mortgagee will accept either the
payment or Applicant’s payment plan proposal. As Applicant testified, the mortgagee
wants him to pay the entire balance. Moreover, even if the mortgagee accepts
Applicant’s payment plan, it would be too soon to conclude that the problem is under
7
control given the recency of the first payment and the amount owed. AG ¶ 20(d), “the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” is inapplicable.
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant deserves credit for his exceptional service in the Marines and his
strong employment record. Also, he demonstrated maturity by developing a cordial
relationship with his ex-spouse for the benefit of their child’s well-being.
However, I cannot reconcile these positive attributes with the lapse of judgment
and responsibility that he demonstrated with his recent criminal conduct. This conduct
ultimately contributed to his financial problems that are currently unresolved. Upon
considering this case in the context of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant
failed to mitigate the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
8
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
