 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02034 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance questionnaire on April 17, 2008. On 
August 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence; and Guideline C, Foreign Preference, for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 22, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
October 20, 2009. The case was assigned to me on October 22, 2009. On November 
10, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for December 3, 2009. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. The government offered Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 - 3, which were admitted without objection. The government requested that 
administrative notice be taken of four documents. The documents were marked as 
 
2 
 
 
Administrative Notice Document (Admin Not) I - IV without objection. A memorandum 
prepared by Department Counsel summarizing key points in the administrative notice 
documents has been marked as Demonstrative Exhibit 1 based on Applicant’s 
counsel’s objection to the memorandum being marked as an administrative notice 
document. Applicant testified and submitted 16 exhibits which were admitted as 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - P without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of hearing 
on December 11, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The following information is from the administrative notice documents: 
 
Columbia is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with a population of 
approximately 44.8 million. Dual U.S. – Colombian citizens must present a Colombian 
passport to enter and exit Colombia.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to 
Columbia because violence by narco-terrorist groups continues to affect some rural 
areas and cities.  While security in Colombia has improved significantly in recent years, 
terrorists and other criminal organizations continue to kidnap and hold persons of all 
nationalities and occupations for use as bargaining chips. The incidences of kidnapping 
in Colombia have diminished significantly from the peak at the beginning of this decade.  
 
The U.S. Secretary of State has designated three Columbian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), 
and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) - as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations. These groups carried out bombings and other attacks in and around 
major urban areas, including against civilian targets. 
 
The Columbian government’s respect for human rights continued to improve. 
However, illegal armed groups and terrorist groups committed the majority of human 
rights violations – including political killings and kidnappings, forced disappearances, 
torture, and other serious human rights abuses.  
 
The United States remained fully committed to supporting the Colombian 
government in its efforts to defeat Colombian-based Foreign Terrorist Organizations. 
The Colombian government continues vigorous law enforcement, intelligence, military 
and economic measures against the FARC, ELN, and AUC. The Colombian 
government has also increased its efforts with neighboring countries to thwart terrorist 
expansion, investigate terrorist activities inside and outside Colombia, seize assets, 
secure hostage release, and bring terrorists to justice. Colombia provided anti-terrorism 
training to nations in the region. The government continues to seek enhanced regional 
counterterrorism cooperation to target terrorist safe havens in vulnerable border areas.  
 
 
3 
 
 
The United States – Colombia extradition relationship remains the most 
successful and comprehensive effort in the world.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated September 22, 2009, Applicant admits to all the 
SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old research scientist employed with a Department of 
Defense contractor applying for a security clearance. She has worked for the same 
employer since January 7, 2008. This is her first time applying for a security clearance. 
She has a doctorate in computer science. She is married and has a daughter, age 9.  
(Tr at 26-32; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant was born and raised in Colombia. She attended school in Colombia. In 
1988, she moved to the United States to study for her master’s degree. She completed 
her master’s degree and then pursued her doctorate at a U.S. university. She 
completed her doctorate in 1996. (Tr at 28-29) 
 
In August 1996, Applicant was employed as an assistant professor at a U.S. 
university. She then briefly worked as a software design engineer for a computer 
technology company from February 2000 to May 2000. After the birth of her daughter, 
she took three years off. From September 2003 to May 2005, she was an assistant 
professor at another U.S. university. After May 2005, she and her husband opened their 
own firm. She worked there until she accepted her current position. (Tr at 30 – 31; Gov 
1, section 11)  
 
Applicant married her husband in 1998. He was born and raised in the United 
States. In October 2000, Applicant’s daughter was born in the United States. Applicant 
became a U.S. citizen in 2004. After becoming a U.S. citizen, she immediately applied 
for a U.S. passport. She traveled to Canada on one occasion using her Colombian 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. Her U.S. passport had not arrived in time before 
the trip. Since that trip, she has always traveled using her U.S. passport. On October 
15, 2008, she destroyed her Colombian passport in the presence of her company’s 
facility security officer. She is willing to renounce her Colombian citizenship. (Tr at 31, 
34, 45, 47-49; Gov 2 at 23) 
 
Applicant voted in the Colombian presidential elections in May 2006. She went to 
the Colombian Consulate to place her absentee ballot. Before she voted, she made 
sure that she could legally vote in the Colombian election after becoming a U.S. citizen. 
She voted for President Uribe because he is a staunch ally of the United States. She 
voted before she applied for a security clearance and was unaware of the security 
issues raised by voting in a foreign election. She does not intend to vote in future 
Colombian elections. (Tr at 45-46, 50, 55) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has ten siblings who are citizens of and reside in Colombia. One 
brother is a retired economist. Another brother is a retired civil engineer for the local 
telephone company. From 1969 to 1971, he served in the Colombian Navy. Another 
brother is a self-employed dental technician at a dental lab. Another brother is a 
construction auditor. He tests the soundness of buildings. One brother is a computer 
scientist who may work as a government contractor for the Colombian government.  
One of Applicant’s sisters is a retired economist. One of her sisters is a retired librarian. 
Two sisters are retired school teachers. One sister is a dentist. Aside from her brother 
who is a computer scientist, Applicant does not believe any of her siblings work for or 
are affiliated with the Colombian government. (Tr at 33-35; Gov 2; Gov 3)  
 
Applicant’s contact varies with each sibling.  They call each other on birthdays 
and holidays. She has seen most of her relatives two or three times within the past eight 
years. She telephones each of them on average of two to three times a year. She 
traveled to Colombia twice in 2001 when her mother was still living. The last time she 
traveled to Colombia was in 2002 to attend her mother’s funeral. Some of her siblings 
visited her in December 2006 and 2009. (Tr at 36-38, 40)  
 
Applicant has occasional contact with extended family members who are citizens 
of and reside in Colombia. She does not provide financial support to any of her 
relatives. (Tr at 40-41; Gov 3 at 13-14; Gov 2 at 27-29) 
 
Applicant inherited a small interest in her father’s house when he passed away. 
In 2007 – 2008, she visited the Colombian Consulate on several occasions to sign a 
power of attorney in order to divest her interest in her father’s home. She no longer has 
an interest in her father’s house. She owns no property or other financial assets outside 
of the United States. (Tr at 41-42, 50; Gov 3 at 7) 
 
After her mother passed away in 2002, Applicant has had no interest in traveling 
to Colombia. Her life is in the United States with her husband and daughter. The United 
States has given her a lot of opportunities. She considers the United States her home. 
She and her husband’s net worth is approximately $230,000. All of her assets are 
located in the United States. (Tr at 51-52; Gov 2 at 9) 
 
The Facility Security Officer of Applicant’s company provided a letter stating that 
Applicant has not been involved in any security incidents. He states that Applicant has 
been proactive in keeping up-to-date with knowledge of security practices by attending 
security training and reading security training materials. (AE A) 
 
The Senior Vice President, Director of Information Systems and Security of 
Applicant’s company wrote a letter on her behalf.  He has been her direct supervisor  
since January 2008.  He states that Applicant is trustworthy and dedicated to her work.  
Her work has been praised by the company’s clients in the defense industry. He 
strongly supports her application to obtain a security clearance. (AE B) Other individuals 
wrote letters saying similar favorable things about Applicant. (AE C – F) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s 2008 Employee Performance Review indicates that she meets 
standards. (AE H) She has been recognized by her employer for her performance. (AE 
O) In April 1999, she received a grant from the National Science Foundation – Faculty 
Early Career Development Program. (Tr at 30; AE N)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG &6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Of the Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC), the following apply 
to Applicant’s case: 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(a) (contact with a family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion); 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group or country by providing 
that information) 
 
Applicant’s ten siblings are citizens and residents of Colombia. Applicant also 
has several extended family members who are citizens of and residents of Colombia.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an Applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create a heightened risk for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001) 
 
 
7 
 
 
In this case, FI DC ¶ 7(a) and FI DC ¶ 7(b) apply because Applicant has contacts 
with and connections to her family members in Colombia. All of her siblings live in 
Colombia. Applicant’s contact with her siblings several times a year creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.  
However, Applicant’s ties to her extended family members who are citizens of and 
reside in Colombia are not nearly as strong as her ties to her siblings. None of her 
Colombian relatives appear to be connected to high levels of the Colombian 
government.  Her brother works as a computer scientist for a government contractor. 
Her other siblings do not work for the Colombian government. 
 
Three of the six mitigating conditions under the Foreign Influence guideline (FI 
MC) may apply to the facts and circumstances of this case: 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the position or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.) ; 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, or government, 
or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest);  
 
FI MC ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood it could create a risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation). 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(a) and FI MC ¶ 8(c) do not apply because Applicant’s relationships 
with her nuclear-family members in Colombia are of sufficient magnitude to negate 
these two mitigating conditions.  There is at least a remote or slight possibility that 
dangerous elements within Colombia could attempt to use her family members to 
coerce or pressure Applicant. 
  
FI MC ¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States support the conclusion that she can be expected to resolve 
any conflict in favor of the United States interest. Applicant moved to the United States 
in 1988. She earned her master’s and doctorate degrees at U.S. universities. She has 
been gainfully employed in the United States and has not worked in foreign countries 
after moving to the United States.  Her husband is a U.S. citizen. Her daughter was 
born and has been raised in the United States. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2004. 
She has lived and worked in the United States for 22 years. She does not possess a 
valid foreign passport. She intends to live and work in the United States for the rest of 
her life. The last time she traveled to Colombia was in 2002 to attend her mother’s 
 
8 
 
 
funeral. Now that both her parents are gone, she feels her life is now in the United 
States. Her strongest ties are in the United States.   
    
Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States 
outweigh any potential for conflict because of Applicant’s relationship to her siblings and 
extended relatives who are citizens of and reside in Colombia.  The Guideline B 
concern is mitigated. 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG &9:       
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.   
  
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC)10(a) (exercise of any 
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or 
through foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) 
possession of a current foreign passport; (7) voting in a foreign election); and FP DC ¶ 
10(b) (action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American 
citizen) apply. Applicant exercised her Colombian citizenship after becoming a U.S. 
citizen in 2004 when she voted in the 2006 Colombian presidential election. Although 
not alleged in the SOR, she also exercised her Colombian citizenship when she 
traveled on her Colombian passport on a trip to Canada shortly after becoming a U.S. 
citizen.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Foreign Preference. The following Foreign Preference Mitigating 
Conditions (FI MC) apply: 
 
FP MC ¶ 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship) Applicant was unaware that voting in the Colombian presidential election in 
2006 would raise an issue related to her security clearance. In fact, she did not apply for 
a security clearance until two years after the election. Before voting in the Colombian 
presidential election, she made sure it was legal to do so as a dual citizen. Now that she 
is aware of the security issues raised by voting in a foreign election, she does not intend 
to vote in future Colombian elections. She is willing to renounce her Colombian 
citizenship.  
 
FP MC ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated) applies with respect to Applicant’s use of her 
Colombian passport on a trip to Canada shortly after becoming a U.S. citizen. Her 
 
9 
 
 
reason for doing so was because she did not have time to get her U.S. passport. 
Regardless, she never traveled on her Colombian passport again after obtaining her 
U.S. passport. She destroyed her Colombian passport on October 15, 2008, before the 
SOR was issued which is more than likely the reason why the passport issue was not 
alleged in the SOR. However, I felt it important to address this issue which is mitigation 
under the Foreign Preference concern. 
 
Applicant mitigated the Foreign Preference concerns. Guideline C is found for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.   
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to Colombia, a country that is an ally of the United States but has 
significant internal problems.  
 
I considered that Applicant is highly regarded at her current place of employment. 
She has lived in the United States for over 22 of her 48 years. She became a U.S. 
citizen in 2004. She has not visited Colombia in over seven years. While Applicant’s 
family members living in Colombia raise a potential security threat due to the very 
nature of familial relationships, Applicant’s significant ties to the United States mitigate 
the security threat. Her husband and daughter are citizens of and reside in the United 
States. Her deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States 
strongly support the conclusion that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert 
pressure, coercion, or exploitation in favor of the United States.   
 
 
10 
 
 
While Guideline C, foreign preference concerns were raised because Applicant 
voted in the 2006 Colombian presidential elections, she did not do so before making 
sure that it was legal for her to do so as a dual citizen. She did not apply for a security 
clearance until two years later, and was unaware of the security implications. After 
learning about these concerns, she does not intend to vote in future Colombian 
elections and is willing to renounce her Colombian citizenship.  
 
Guideline B is a security concern that affects applicants through no fault of their 
own. The internal issues within Colombia make it a substantial burden to mitigate the 
concerns raised under foreign influence.  In Applicant’s case, her significant personal 
relationships and contacts within the United States outweigh the concerns raised by 
having relatives who are citizens of and reside in Colombia. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. Foreign Influence and foreign preference security concerns are 
mitigated. 
  
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                              
   
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
