 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04650
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On January 30, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
interrogatories to Applicant to obtain clarification of and/or additional information about
adverse information in her background.  Based on the results of the background1
investigation, including Applicant’s response to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 - 7) proffered4
in support of the government’s case.
2
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with2
the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On
September 4, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG)  under Guideline H (illegal drugs).3
On September 19, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a
decision without a hearing. On October 20, 2009, Department Counsel prepared a File
of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision.4
Applicant received the FORM on November 30, 2009, and was given 30 days to file a
response to the FORM. His response was submitted the same day, and was received
by DOHA on December 11, 2009. The case was assigned to me on January 27, 2010.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged Applicant used marijuana illegally between January and
April 2003. (SOR ¶ 1.a) It was also alleged that he used marijuana again in May 2009.
(SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant admitted both allegations. (FORM, Item 4) In addition to the facts
entered in the record through Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of
relevant fact.
Applicant is 27 years old. Since January 2009, he has been employed by a
defense contractor as a wireman at a job site abroad. He has been steadily employed
since August 1997, and, in 2007, he completed two years of training in computer repair
and networking. When he submitted his e-QIP to obtain a security clearance required
for his current job, Applicant disclosed that he had used marijuana about ten times with
a roommate between January 2003 and April 2003. (FORM, Item 5) This is his first
application for a security clearance.
On May 5, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator as part
of his background investigation. He stated that he used marijuana on one occasion with
his roommate in March 2004. (FORM, Item 7) However, in response to DOHA
interrogatories, stated that he used marijuana from January 2003 until April 2003, which
was consistent with his e-QIP disclosure. He further stated that he stopped using
marijuana at that time because he wanted to earn a promotion at work and started to
take his job more seriously. (FORM, Item 6) 
 Directive. 6.3.5
3
In response to the same interrogatories, and during his May 2009 interview,
Applicant also stated that he used marijuana on May 2, 2009, because he was
emotionally stressed over the death of his girlfriend’s father, to whom he was very close.
The marijuana he used that day was supplied by his girlfriend’s brother-in-law. (FORM,
Items 6 and 7)
Applicant has acknowledged that he used very poor judgment when he used
marijuana in 2009. Through his notarized responses to the SOR (FORM, Item 4) and
the FORM, he has stated in writing that he has not used marijuana since May 2009, and
that he intends to abstain from using marijuana in the future. However, he has also
acknowledged that it will be difficult to disassociate himself from his girlfriend’s brother-
in-law, but he will try to avoid any situation that might include the possibility of illegal
drug use.
Applicant has a good reputation at work. His supervisor since about June 2009
lauds Applicant’s integrity and dedication to his job. He further cited Applicant’s value to
his company’s work for the Department of Defense, which resulted in Applicant’s
retention with the company despite a recent force reduction for the contract to which
Applicant is assigned. (Response to FORM)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors5
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concern and adjudicative factors under AG ¶ 24
(Guideline H - drug involvement).
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the national interest.8
Analysis
Drug Involvement
The government presented sufficient information in the FORM to support the
SOR allegations that Applicant used illegal drugs between January and April 2003, and
in May 2009. Applicant also admitted those allegations. Available information raises a
security concern about Applicant’s use of illegal drugs addressed in AG ¶ 24, as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (a) Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; (b) drug abuse is the illegal use of
a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 25(a) (a) Any drug abuse (see above definition). I have also
considered the possibility that Applicant was given an interim clearance when he
submitted his e-QIP. This would make applicable the disqualifying condition at AG ¶
 See footnote 5, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
5
25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance); however, available
information does not clearly establish that he held a security clearance in May 2009.  
By contrast, of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 26, only AG ¶ 26(a)
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) dissociation from drug-using
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) are potentially applicable here.
Applicant’s last drug use must be considered recent as it happened less than 12
months ago. Had he not used drugs after he stopped in April 2003, his conduct would
likely not be a current security concern. It may be unlikely that he will again be offered
marijuana while he is as emotionally stressed as when his girlfriend’s father died.
However, because he resumed using marijuana after more than six years of abstinence,
he may still associate with his girlfriend’s brother-in-law who uses marijuana, and used
marijuana after submitting his e-QIP, not enough time has passed to safely conclude
that Applicant will not use marijuana in stressful times to come. Despite his stated intent
to abstain from future drug use, I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b) do not apply,
and that Applicant has failed to mitigate the adverse inferences of the government’s
information.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant, a 29-year-old defense
contractor, is presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He has the confidence of his
supervisor of the past eight months, and he has been steadily employed for his entire
adult life. However, the positive information in the record is insufficient to overcome the
security concerns raised by his recent use of illegal drugs. A fair and commonsense
assessment  of all available information bearing on Applicant’s involvement with illegal9
drugs shows that the recent recurrence of his conduct in this regard after more than six
years creates doubts about Applicant’s suitability to hold a clearance that his responses
have not adequately addressed. Because protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the
government.10
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
