 
1 
 
 
                                                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
  ) 
           )   ISCR Case No. 09-01896 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and the whole person analysis.  His eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant executed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on July 9, 2007. On September 2, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On September 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 
2009. I convened a hearing on January 13, 2010, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced nine exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 9 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called no witnesses. He introduced 15 exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. O. All of Applicant’s 
exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing on January 21, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG E, 
Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). SOR allegation 1.a. alleged that Applicant 
exhibited questionable judgment when he masturbated in various public locations. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation and stated that he had not 
engaged in such conduct since 2004. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 SOR allegation 1.b. alleged that Applicant exhibited questionable judgment when 
he engaged in multiple affairs despite being married. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied the allegation as written. He admitted to engaging in two extramarital 
affairs while married to his first wife. He attributed his affairs to his wife’s depression and 
its negative impact on their intimacy. He identified his affair of approximately 10 years 
with a man as “not frequent and insignificant.” He admitted a second affair with a 
woman in 2002. He reported that in 2007 he married the woman and, with her, he was 
involved in a faith community. He stated that the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. “was not 
an accurate reflection of [his] current judgment or reliability.” (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 SOR allegation 1.c. alleged that Applicant exhibited questionable judgment when 
he engaged in sexual relations with prostitutes. Applicant admitted that he had engaged 
in sexual relations with prostitutes on two occasions in 1985 and 1989. He denied any 
contact with prostitutes since 1989 and stated that he did not “believe that this outdated 
information accurately reflects [his] current reliability or trustworthiness.” Applicant’s 
admissions to the SOR allegations are admitted herein as findings of fact. (SOR; 
Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and employed as a senior program analyst by a 
government contractor. He is a graduate of one of the national service academies, 
where, in 1978, he received a Bachelor of Science degree in physical sciences. In 1989, 
he received a Master of Science degree in science and systems technology. (Ex. 1; Tr. 
57-58.) 
 
 Applicant was first granted a security clearance in about 1974, when he was a 
student at a national service academy. After graduation from the service academy, he 
served on active military duty for 26 years and retired in 2004 as a colonel (O-6). He 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
held a security clearance throughout his military service. He received an honorable 
retirement from service. (Tr. 32-33, 58.) 
 
   Applicant was married in 1982. He is the father of two sons. His older son was 
born in 1984, and his younger son was born in 1989. Applicant’s wife suffered from 
depression, which was diagnosed in about 1985. Applicant’s wife’s illness, which 
continued for about 18 years, was treated with medication. As a consequence of his 
wife’s depression, there were times when Applicant and his wife were not intimate, and 
he assumed additional household and childcare duties. (Ex. 1; Tr. 88-91.)  
 
 In 1985 and 1989, Applicant engaged the services of female prostitutes. In the 
1990s, he masturbated while driving on an interstate highway. In 1992, he began a 
sexual relationship with a man he met through a newspaper advertisement. The 
relationship lasted until 2002 or 2003. In an interview with a licensed psychologist in 
October 2009, Applicant stated that his sexual encounters with the man were 
“intermittent” and occurred “possibly 10 times a year.”1 He denied an emotional 
attachment with the man. He told the man he was in the U.S. military. Applicant was on 
active duty and held a security clearance throughout the affair. He knew that his active 
duty career would be jeopardized if his command learned of the affair, and he 
concealed it.  His wife was not aware of the relationship. (Ex. K at 2; Tr. 62, 85-87.)    
 
 Between 2001 and 2003, Applicant masturbated in public shower rooms and 
steam rooms that were provided by his government employer for the use of male 
military and civilian employees. He also masturbated in public in an adult bookstore 
between 2001 and 2003. This behavior also occurred while he was assigned to active 
duty and held a security clearance. (Ex. K at 2; Tr. 36, 58, 65-66.)  
 
 In 2002, Applicant, while serving on active duty as an officer in the Department of 
Defense, met a woman at work who was serving on active duty as an enlisted person. 
Applicant began to date the woman in May 2002. He knew his relationship with the 
woman violated provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) prohibiting 
adultery and fraternization. He kept the relationship hidden from his command. In 
September 2002, Applicant sought a legal separation from his wife. Sometime in 2002 
or 2003, Applicant broke off his relationship with his male lover. He told the man he had 
become involved with a woman, was happy, and would not see him anymore. 
Applicant’s divorce from his wife became final in July 2004. He pays alimony to his first 
wife. (Ex. 1; Ex. 9; Tr. 59-63, 91-92, 104-105.)    
 
  Applicant and his female friend were married in May 2007. Before their 
marriage, they joined a church and sought counseling to prepare themselves for 
marriage. They have remained in the church and are active in the congregation’s 
 
1 At his hearing, Applicant asserted that he met the man “very infrequently, a couple of times a year.” He 
had no explanation for the discrepancy between the “possibly 10 times a year” reported by the 
psychologist and his estimate at his hearing of infrequent meetings of about twice a year. He 
acknowledged that he was the only person who provided the psychologist with information about the 
affair. (Tr. 85, 98-99.) 
 
4 
 
 
marriage ministry. Applicant’s second wife has three young adult children. They reside 
with their mother and Applicant. Applicant considers his second marriage to be normal 
and happy. He regrets the behavior alleged in the SOR and characterizes it as “stupid.” 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 41-44, 49, 68.) 
 
 After retiring from active service, Applicant obtained employment as a 
government contractor. In 2004, Applicant’s employer recommended him for a security 
clearance. As a part of the security clearance application process, Applicant was 
interviewed by investigators at another government agency and given a polygraph test. 
In interviews with the investigators, Applicant provided the information alleged in the 
SOR. In December 2004, the other government agency denied Applicant’s access to 
classified information because of security concerns over his sexual behavior and 
personal conduct.  (Ex. 8; Ex. 9; Tr. 33-35.) 
 
 In March 2007, Applicant accepted a job with another employer and completed 
an e-QIP. His employer sponsored him for a security clearance. In August 2007, he was 
interviewed by an authorized investigator. In his interview, Applicant told the investigator 
that his first wife might allege marital infidelity because he began dating his current wife 
after he and his first wife were legally separated. Applicant also told the investigator that 
another government agency had denied him a security clearance in 2004, after he failed 
a polygraph examination. Applicant also told the investigator that he “was not made 
aware of the reasons for not passing the polygraph.” He did not discuss his 10-year 
affair and his masturbation behavior with the investigator. (Ex. 1; Ex. 7 at 5-6; Tr. 78-
79.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant explained that he had received 
two documents from the other government agency pertaining to the denial of his access 
to classified information. He stated that he had discarded both documents but had 
retrieved one of them, dated 1 September 2004, which he attached. He stated he no 
longer had a copy of the second document, which he characterized as follows: 
 
 As I recall, this second document described my responses to a life-
style polygraph I had taken in 2004. I believe it included details describing 
my affair with an enlisted female soldier while I was married and an 
Active-duty officer  . . . during the time period 2002 through 2004. I believe 
the document stated I was denied a security clearance because my 
conduct at that time demonstrated a lack of judgment. Retired and 
divorced in 2004, I eventually married the same enlisted female soldier 
(also retired) in May 2007. 
 
(Ex. 8 at 4.)    
 
 The second communication that Applicant received from the other government 
agency was dated December 8, 2004. This document was offered and received into 
evidence, without objection, by the Government. The document recites why the other 
 
5 
 
 
government organization disapproved Applicant for access to classified information 
based on the following information: 
 
During your June 2004 security testing sessions, you advised that over the 
last ten years you have engaged in several extra-marital affairs, to include 
some with prostitutes. You said that one of these affairs was a 10-year 
relationship with a male you met through a newspaper ad; you noted that 
you kept this affair hidden because you feared, as an active duty [officer], 
that you would lose your career should the affair become known. You also 
said that you have kept hidden on ongoing affair you have been engaged 
in with an active duty military female for the last two years. Because you 
are an officer and she is enlisted, the situation is considered fraternization 
and a violation of the United States [Uniform] Code of Military Justice. You 
further advised that you have engaged in repeated public masturbation in 
the following venues: the open bay showers at [a government agency] 
gym with a group of men; in your vehicle while driving on the interstate; 
and, in open-door video booths in an adult bookstore. You noted that you 
engaged in this behavior despite knowing there was a risk you could get 
caught.  
 
(Ex. 9 at 1-2.) 
 
 On October 8 and October 22, 2009, Applicant voluntarily submitted to a 
psychological evaluation “to determine his current intellectual and personality 
functioning for the purpose of maintaining the security clearance necessary for his 
employment.” During his interview with a licensed psychologist, Applicant admitted the 
behaviors recited in the paragraph above that led the other government agency to 
conclude that he was not security worthy. (Ex. K; Ex. L.) 
 
 Over the two days of his evaluation by the psychologist, Applicant was given 18 
psychological and intelligence-measuring tests. The several tests revealed that 
Applicant’s cognitive abilities were superior, and his intellectual quotient score of 120 
placed him above 91% of his peers. The tests did not reveal that Applicant 
demonstrated sexually deviant beliefs or behaviors. In his summary and evaluation, the 
evaluating psychologist observed: “[I]t is likely that when [Applicant] becomes 
overwhelmed by stress due to outside situations, his social capacities modulate, 
creating the potential for impulsive behavior. This tendency is then compounded by a 
tendency to withdraw socially, become less expressive, and more self-protective 
through the use of denial and repression.”  (Ex. K at 8-9.) 
 
 Applicant’s fitness report for the period covering April 2001 to May 2002, was 
laudatory. His reviewing officer commented that he was “an outstanding officer with 
unlimited potential,” possessed “rock solid character and values,” and had applied “a 
powerful intellect and energy to the emergent and tremendously complex homeland 
security challenges facing our nation.” His fitness report went on to state, in pertinent 
part:  
 
6 
 
 
In tough, demanding wartime conditions, [Applicant] demonstrated the 
moral courage to make the tough calls and give the hard advice required 
by leaders at the highest level of government. His efforts helped our senior 
leaders make the right decisions on complex issues dealing with the role 
of the US military in defense of the homeland. [Applicant] is a trusted 
advisor admired for his expertise, unwavering integrity, and selfless 
service. The issues he has worked are headlines of the Washington Post 
every day. He has delivered the highest standard of duty performance at a 
critical time in our nation’s history. He has proved himself ready for 
command every day this past year. Applicant is a . . . leader worthy of 
respect, emulation, and most assuredly command of a . . . [large unit].   
 
(Ex. C at 2-3.) 
 
 Applicant’s military fitness report for the rating period of June 2003 to June 2004 
stated that he had continued to “perform in an outstanding manner.” The report also 
noted that Applicant was retiring “after a highly successful 26 years [of active military 
service.]” (Ex. D at 2-3.)  
 
 Applicant’s current manager provided a letter of character reference for the 
record. He recited that he had known Applicant since 1978 and had served with him in 
the military. He stated that Applicant’s personal and professional conduct was of the 
highest quality. He praised Applicant’s leadership ability, reliability, dependability, and 
sound judgment. He stated that he hired Applicant “for his intellectual firepower, ethics, 
leadership ability, and his proven track record of integrity and truthfulness.” (Ex. M at 1.) 
 
 When Applicant asked his current manager to write a letter of character 
reference for him, he told the manager that he had been denied a security clearance 
because he had been unfaithful to his first wife. (Tr. 55-56.) 
 
 A former employer also provided a letter of character reference for Applicant. He 
stated that he had known Applicant professionally and socially for 3½ years. He praised 
Applicant’s logical thinking, trustworthiness, and integrity. (Ex. A at 1.) 
 
 Applicant told the woman who became his second wife about his 10-year affair 
with another male after he revealed it in his 2004 polygraph examination. His two sons 
do not know about the affair. Applicant’s current manager and his former business 
associate and personal friend, who provided letters of character reference for Applicant, 
do not know about the 10-year affair or Applicant’s relationships with prostitutes.  
Likewise, the military officers who assessed Applicant’s job performance in his fitness 
reports did not know about his 10-year affair and his relationships with prostitutes. (Tr. 
64-65.) 
 
 Neither Applicant’s current wife nor the individuals who provided letters of 
character reference know that he masturbated in his government employer’s shower 
rooms, in his automobile, and in adult bookstores while on active military duty. The 
 
7 
 
 
military officers who assessed Applicant’s job performance in his fitness reports did not 
know that he masturbated in his government employer’s shower rooms, in his 
automobile, and in adult bookstores while on active duty. They did not know that 
Applicant, a married man, was having an affair with an enlisted woman in military 
service in 2002. (Tr. 59-66.)  
 
 Applicant and his current wife have had marriage counseling from their pastor. 
His two meetings with the licensed psychologist in October 2009 were primarily for 
testing and evaluation, and he has not seen the psychologist since that time. He has 
discussed his infidelity in his first marriage in counseling sessions with the pastor.  
Applicant has not had psychological counseling or therapy related to the other 
behaviors alleged on the SOR. (Tr. 46, 68-71.)  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
8 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant was a high-ranking officer who was educated at a national service 
academy. For approximately 26 years, he held a security clearance. He carried out 
duties of significance to national security. 
 
Applicant served on active duty for 26 years, until he honorably retired in 2004. 
From about 1985, Applicant engaged in high risk personal conduct that, if discovered, 
likely would have ended his active duty career. As a married man, he hired female 
prostitutes, began and carried out a sexual relationship with an enlisted woman he met 
at work, and engaged in a sexual relationship with a male that lasted for over ten years. 
 
9 
 
 
Additionally, Applicant masturbated as he drove in his automobile, in public shower 
rooms in a government facility, and in adult book stores. Applicant knew his behavior 
violated various articles of the UCMJ, and he did not disclose his misconduct to his 
command.  Six years later, as a civilian, he has not disclosed most of that behavior to 
his family, business associates, and to his current manager, who provided him with a 
letter of character reference and endorsed him for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(b), 
16(d)(3), and 16(e)(1). AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(d)(3) 
reads: “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, 
when combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to 
consideration of . . .  a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.” AG ¶ 16(e)(1), reads in 
pertinent part as follows: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing.”   
 
 The disqualifying behavior alleged in the SOR occurred between 1985 and 2004. 
However, with the exception of his marital infidelity with the enlisted woman who 
became his second wife, Applicant failed to disclose the other behavior alleged in the 
SOR to his employer. His failure to disclose this information is ongoing and continues to 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Additionally, the 
behaviors he failed to disclose would, if they were known, affect his personal, 
professional, and community standing, and they create in him a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant is happily married to his second wife and he and his wife attend and 
participate in marriage counseling at their church. He has attempted to remedy his past 
vulnerability to marital infidelity. 
 
Applicant’s intellectual and psychological functioning was evaluated by a licensed 
psychologist, but he has not sought counseling or treatment from a psychiatrist or 
psychologist for the impulsive and high-risk sexual behavior and personal conduct he 
engaged in for many years. The licensed psychologist who evaluated him concluded 
that “[I]t is likely that when [Applicant] becomes overwhelmed by stress due to outside 
situations, his social capacities modulate, creating the potential for impulsive behavior. 
This tendency is then compounded by a tendency to withdraw socially, become less 
expressive, and more self-protective through the use of denial and repression.” 
Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to obtain sufficient counseling or to take other  
material positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
 
10 
 
 
his untrustworthy, unreliable, and inappropriate behavior raises concerns that the 
behavior may recur and that he may continue to be vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.  
 
I have carefully reviewed the several mitigating conditions under Guideline E. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 17(d) applies in part to Applicant’s marital counseling from his 
pastor. I also conclude that no other mitigating conditions are applicable in this case.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 53 
years. He is intelligent and well-educated. For nearly 20 years, however, while holding a 
security clearance and while carrying out high-level security responsibilities as a senior   
officer, Applicant engaged in ongoing high-risk behavior that exposed him to the 
possibility of exploitation, manipulation, or duress. He violated rules when he 
deliberately carried out the behavior and then failed to disclose his misconduct to his 
command. Even now, he has not disclosed fully his rule-breaking and inappropriate 
behavior to his family, his business associates, and his current civilian government 
contractor employer. 
 
 Applicant has not sought professional psychological counseling or treatment for 
his impulsive and high risk behavior. He has not provided sufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation, and he failed to establish that the behavior would not recur. He has not 
disclosed his behavior to those in his personal and professional life who may have a 
need to know about it, raising ongoing concerns about his judgment, trustworthiness, 
and reliability.    
 
11 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I conclude, 
after a careful review of the facts of his case, the Personal Conduct adjudicative 
guideline, and the whole person analysis, that Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                    
___________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
