                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ADP Case No. 09-02907 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate trustworthiness concerns regarding her connections to 
her sister who lives in Taiwan under Guideline B (foreign influence) and the whole 
person concept. Guideline C (foreign preference) concerns are mitigated despite her 
ownership share in a condominium located in Taiwan. She also obtained a Taiwan 
Identification Card after receipt of her statement of reasons (SOR). Applicant’s eligibility 
to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2008, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Public Trust 
Positions (SF 85P) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On August 24, 2009, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her 
(hearing exhibit (HE) 3), pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised; Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines C (foreign 
preference) and B (foreign influence) (HE 3). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Regulation that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy 
a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information (HE 3). DOHA 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such access to 
sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On August 31, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (HE 4). On 
October 1, 2009, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed. On 
November 13, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice (HE 1). Applicant’s hearing was 
held as scheduled on December 16, 2009. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
three exhibits (GE 1-3) (Transcript (Tr.) 18-19), and Applicant offered one exhibit (Tr. 
32-33; AE A). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-3 (Tr. 19), and AE A (Tr. 
32-33). Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR, and hearing notice (HE 
1-3). On December 28, 2009, I received the transcript. On January 5, 2010, Department 
Counsel forwarded AE B to me without objection, and I admitted AE B into evidence. I 
closed the record on January 15, 2010 (Tr. 82). 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Taiwan 
(Tr. 18-19). Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and 
context for these facts in the Administrative Notice request. Applicant and Department 
Counsel did not object to me taking administrative notice of all of the facts in all of the 
documents (Tr. 19). See the Taiwan section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, 
infra, for the material facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on Taiwan.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR subparagraphs (HE 3). 
However, she denied that she had a preference for Taiwan. She also denied that she 
was at risk for being influenced because of her relatives living in Taiwan, or due to a 
preference for Taiwan (HE 3). Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor (Tr. 7). In 1990, she 
earned a bachelor’s degree in information systems management from a U.S. college 
(Tr. 7-8). Her employment involves development of software used for medical records 
(Tr. 21). She also manages support personnel, who are involved with processing 
medical records (Tr. 21). 
 
Applicant was born in Taiwan (Tr. 23). She moved to the United States in 1985 or 
1986 to join her husband, who had moved to the United States two or three years 
earlier (Tr. 23; GE 3 at 3). She became a U.S. citizen in about 1999 or 2000 (Tr. 23). 
She obtained a U.S. passport in 2002, and it is still active (Tr. 24). 
 
Applicant is married, and she has two children (Tr. 22; GE 3 at 3). Her husband 
and two children were born in Taiwan (Tr. 22). Her two children were born in 1973 and 
1974 (GE 3 at 3). Her husband is employed in the United States, and provides software 
used for national defense (Tr. 22). He does not hold a security clearance (Tr. 22). Her 
husband and two children are U.S. citizens (GE 1). 
  
Applicant’s mother, three sisters, and two brothers are citizens and residents of 
Taiwan (Tr. 30; HE 3; SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). In September 2009, her father died. He did 
not have a will (Tr. 52). Applicant and her relatives living in Taiwan disputed with each 
other the amount of property each should receive from Applicant’s father’s estate. 
 
Applicant applied for a Taiwanese passport on October 16, 2008, and possessed 
this Taiwan passport for the next 12 months (Tr. 24; HE 3; AE A; SOR ¶ 1.a). It had an 
expiration date of October 16, 2018 (GE 3 at 7; HE 3; SOR ¶ 1.a). In June 2009, when 
she received DOHA interrogatories, she was advised that she should provide her 
Taiwan passport to her security officer; however, she declined the request because she 
needed it to help her obtain her share of her father’s estate (Tr. 25, 33-34; GE 3 at 12; 
HE 3; SOR ¶ 1.a). She used her Taiwan passport to apply for a Taiwan Identification 
Card (TIC) (GE 3 at 12). She wanted to retain her Taiwan passport until she secured an 
inheritance she estimated (in June 2009) at about $300,000 (GE 3 at 12). She promised 
after she received her inheritance that she would destroy her Taiwan passport (GE 3 at 
12). On November 6, 2009, Applicant provided her Taiwanese passport to her security 
officer because she did not need it anymore (Tr. 32-34; AE A). 
 
In October 2009, after Applicant responded to the SOR, she obtained a TIC and 
opened a Taiwanese bank account (Tr. 26-27). She needed the TIC so she could obtain 
and deposit her $600,000 share of her father’s estate into a Taiwan bank (Tr. 26, 28; 
GE 3 at 12). On December 10, 2009, she transferred almost all of the money from the 
Taiwan bank into a U.S. bank (Tr. 26-27). She has about 1,000 Taiwanese dollars in her 
Taiwan bank account (Tr. 27).  
 
Applicant gave a limited power of attorney to a relative in Taiwan, which specified 
a requirement that Applicant receive a one seventh share of her father’s estate (Tr. 31). 
To settle the estate, Applicant received one seventh of her father’s estate (Tr. 29-30, 
60-64). Some of her siblings and her mother in Taiwan were very unhappy that she 
received so much of her father’s estate (Tr. 29-30). They thought she should have 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
received at most seven or eight percent, and instead she received 14.3 percent (Tr. 31). 
However, the division of the estate for her mother and siblings ranged from nothing to 
more than 30% (Tr. 64-65). For example, her mother only received .3% (Tr. 64). Her 
siblings sometimes called her more than ten times a day in an attempt to get Applicant 
to give up her share of the estate (Tr. 29).  
 
Applicant calls her mother less than ten times per year, and she communicated 
with most of her siblings on an irregular basis (Tr. 31, 49; GE 3 at 4). She has not 
communicated with some of her siblings over the telephone for years. Recently, she has 
been screening her incoming telephone calls. Sometimes when a call came in from her 
siblings, Applicant did not talk to them (Tr. 49). Her brother (B) left a voice message 
threatening to kill Applicant and her husband (Tr. 51-52, 55). Applicant promised that 
she would not give in to this coercion, which was designed to convince her to relinquish 
her share of her father’s estate (Tr. 51). Applicant saved the recording; however, she 
did not report the threat to the police (Tr. 52, 57).  
 
B has a history of financial problems. B was able to get Applicant’s mother’s 
inheritance from Applicant’s mother (Tr. 53-54). One of her sisters is also very angry 
about Applicant receiving so much of their father’s estate, and she threatened Applicant 
(Tr. 56). Applicant thought these threats might be a true cause for concern (Tr. 57). 
Another of Applicant’s sisters (S) surrendered her share of the estate because she was 
worried about the threats and coercion (Tr. 65). Applicant did not consider B to be an 
ethical, responsible person (Tr. 53, 57). Her siblings considered a lawsuit against 
Applicant over the inheritance (Tr. 61). Applicant emphasized that she would not give in 
to this pressure or coercion (Tr. 61). Applicant was able to ignore the threats of physical 
harm because she was not in Taiwan (Tr. 62). 
 
Applicant has owned a condominium in Taiwan since the 1970s, which is 
currently valued at about $150,000 (Tr. 36; HE 3; SOR ¶ 2.d). Her brother-in-law, his 
spouse, and his son reside in the condominium (Tr. 36-37; HE 3; SOR ¶ 2.d). They do 
not pay Applicant any rent (Tr. 37). Applicant does not have a mortgage on her 
condominium (Tr. 38). She has a conflict with her husband over disposition of the 
condominium (Tr. 38). Applicant wants to sell the condominium (Tr. 38). Her husband 
has a one-half interest in the condominium because it was purchased during their 
marriage (Tr. 59). Applicant and her husband argued as recently as two weeks before 
her hearing about retention of the condominium in Taiwan (Tr. 59).  
 
Another reason Applicant needed the TIC was for Applicant to “pretend to move 
back to the home” to avoid some of Taiwan’s taxes on the condominium (Tr. 69). She 
planned to pay the family to move out. After the condominium was vacant, she would 
use the TIC to establish her residency, without actually moving into the condominium 
(Tr. 70-71). She did not plan to sell the condominium in the near future; however, she 
also planned to use the TIC when the condominium is sold (Tr. 69-70).2  
 
 
2 On December 29, 2009, Applicant provided her TIC to her security manager with the stipulation 
that it will be returned to her when she leaves employment with the contractor (AE B). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
Applicant’s husband is considering retirement in Taiwan because he believes 
health insurance is better in Taiwan (Tr. 38, 39). She does not plan to retire in Taiwan 
(Tr. 39).3 Instead of moving to Taiwan for her retirement, she would prefer to move in 
with her son, who lives in the United States (Tr. 39).  
 
Applicant traveled to Taiwan once between 1990 and 1994, once in 2006, and 
once in 2008 (Tr. 43, 44, 45, 49; GE 3 at 3; HE 3; SOR ¶ 2.c). Her U.S. passport shows 
Taiwan stamps in October 2006 and September 2008 (GE 3 at I46-I47). Although she 
did not disclose another visit to Taiwan after September 2008, she did not specifically 
deny a visit to Taiwan after September 2008 at her hearing. See n. 3, supra. Applicant’s 
and her husband’s families living in Taiwan have not visited the United States (Tr. 49). 
During her 2006 and 2008 visits to Taiwan, she stayed with her mother, and her siblings 
visited her (GE 3 at 3). Applicant told the OPM investigator that she:  
 
.  .  .  traveled to Taiwan in mid-September 2008 to visit her father [ ] who 
was sick and in the hospital [ ]. Subject used her U.S. passport to travel 
there and back. She stayed in Taipei at her mother’s home the entire time. 
Subject stayed with her mother [ ] and visited her father twice each day in 
the hospital. She traveled nowhere else and saw her siblings in her 
mother’s home.    
 
At her hearing, however, Applicant said for her most recent visit she stayed in a 
hotel (Tr. 42). She denied that she even visited her mother, asserting her “mother 
doesn’t like me anymore” (Tr. 43). The basis of her mother’s angst is Applicant “want[s] 
too much money” (Tr. 43).4 
 
Applicant frequently communicated with one of her sisters (S) because S was on 
her side during the dispute over their father’s estate (Tr. 46). Applicant communicates 
with S every couple of days or maybe once a week (Tr. 46, 47; GE 3 at 3). 
 
Applicant has about $250,000 in her 401(k) account, and her husband has about 
$500,000 in his 401(k) account (Tr. 73). She owns two properties in the United States, 
which she values at a total of about $850,000 (Tr. 22, 73). The two properties were 
purchased with cash and do not have mortgages (Tr. 73-74). In September 2009, she 
purchased a home for her son’s residence (Tr. 39). Applicant’s son has part ownership 
 
3 On February 23, 2009, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed 
Applicant (GE 3 at 3-7). On June 15, 2009, Applicant indicated that the OPM investigator’s summary of 
the interview was accurate (GE 3 at 8-9). Applicant’s OPM interview states, “[Applicant] is not yet sure if 
they will retire in Taiwan or in the U.S.” (GE 3 at 5). At her hearing, she initially denied that she had read 
the OPM investigator’s summary of interview before adopting it in June 2009 (Tr. 41). Then she said she 
did not remember adopting it (Tr. 41). Later, she said she did not read it closely (Tr. 60). She disagreed 
with the contention that she might retire in Taiwan (Tr. 42, 60, 79).  
 
4Although there is no specific reference to a visit by Applicant to Taiwan after September 2008, 
Applicant’s reference to staying in a hotel may be referring to a visit to Taiwan after September 2008. 
Another possibility is that Applicant provided incorrect information at her hearing about not staying with 
her mother in September 2008 in order to understate her connections to her mother.  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
of this house (Tr. 22).  She also maintains a substantial balance in a U.S. bank account 
(Tr. 73-74).  
 
There is no derogatory information in Applicant’s security file concerning 
Applicant’s police or financial records. She has never been fired from a job. There is no 
evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-
related incidents. 
 
Taiwan5 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan 
independence, in keeping with the “one China” policy. The United States supports 
Taiwan’s membership in appropriate international organizations where statehood is not 
a requirement for membership and encourages its meaningful participation in 
appropriate international organizations where its membership is not possible.  
 
There are significant economic ties between Taiwan and the People’s Republic 
of China (PRC), which are attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because 
of its location, Taiwan has a particular interest in information from the United States that 
could aid it in its own defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from 
the PRC. The PRC maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau 
utilizing PRC nationals with Taiwanese connections. Unlike the PRC, however, the 
constitutional basis of the Taiwanese government suggests that resort to coercive 
measures against its citizens to collect economic intelligence is unlikely. 
 
The record references various cases involving the illegal export or attempted 
illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to and/or through Taiwan. One 
report to the U.S. Congress concerning foreign economic collection and industrial 
describes espionage occurring in the 1990s. That report notes that Taiwan was then 
known to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence. The report ranked Taiwan 
after China, Japan, Israel, France, and Korea as an active collector of such information. 
Although most of the record information about Taiwan’s intelligence activities targeting 
U.S. classified or sensitive information is more than 10 years old, Appendices X to XV 
outline more recent espionage by Taiwan’s National Intelligence Bureau (NSB). There is 
some evidence that Taiwan has specifically targeted U.S. citizens in the last five to 
seven years to obtain protected and classified information. See e.g., Appendices XIV 
and XV. 
 
Taiwan is a modern democracy with vibrant public participation during which 
demonstrations may become confrontational. The U.S. State Department urges caution 
within the vicinity of any political demonstrations. Overall crime is noted as low.  
 
 
 
 
5The facts in the section concerning Taiwan are from the Department Counsel’s documents 
submitted for Administrative Notice. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance 
[or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant 
trustworthiness concerns are under Guidelines C (foreign preference) and B (foreign 
influence) with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference trustworthiness concern stating, “when 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
In 1999 or 2000, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. In September 2008, she went 
to Taiwan to visit her father, who was dying. Later in September 2008, her father died. 
On October 16, 2008, she obtained a Taiwan passport because it would help her obtain 
a Taiwan Identification Card (TIC). On August 31, 2009, she responded to the SOR, 
which contained an allegation that she intended to apply for a TIC. In October 2009, she 
obtained a TIC because she wanted to obtain her share of her inheritance, and possibly 
to avoid some Taiwanese taxes. She retained her Taiwan citizenship to protect her 
interest in her inheritance of her portion of her father’s estate in Taiwan. After she 
secured her share of his estate, she continued to retain her Taiwan citizenship and TIC 
because she hopes to receive a lesser tax on her Taiwan condominium when it is sold. 
Her TIC shows her residence as her Taiwan condominium, rather than her address in 
the United States. AG ¶ 10(a)(5) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
AG ¶ 11(e) applies and mitigates the concern about Applicant’s past possession 
of her Taiwan passport, and her possession of her TIC. She provided both of these 
documents to her security manager. None of the other mitigating conditions fully apply 
to SOR ¶ 1.a(1) to 1.a(3). However, her retention of Taiwan citizenship as manifested 
by obtaining a Taiwan passport and TIC, in 2008 and 2009, respectively, as well as her 
continued retention of an ownership interest in a condominium located in Taiwan do 
raise some whole person concerns, which are addressed beginning at page 14, infra.       
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concern about “foreign contacts and 
interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003). Applicant, her two children, her husband, her mother, her brothers, and her 
sisters were born in Taiwan. Applicant’s siblings and mother are residents of Taiwan. 
Applicant has particularly close connections to her sister (S) with whom Applicant has 
frequent communications (SOR ¶ 2.b). Applicant and her husband have an interest in a 
condominium in Taiwan with an estimated value of about $150,000 (SOR ¶ 1.d).   
 
After Applicant’s father died in September 2008, Applicant’s communications with 
most of her siblings and mother living in Taiwan became infrequent because of the 
familial conflict over Applicant’s inheritance from her father. However, she does 
communicate frequently with S. Applicant’s relationship with S is sufficient to create “a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” This relationship creates a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s 
“obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and [her] desire to help” S, who 
lives in Taiwan. For example, if criminals or her siblings in Taiwan wanted to expose 
Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on S or offer inducements to S.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in a foreign 
country, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the 
economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States.  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
The relationship of Taiwan with the United States places a moderate, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her 
relationships with her family members living in Taiwan do not pose a trustworthiness 
risk. Taiwan is a democracy with a long history of friendship and cooperation with the 
United States. However, Taiwan has a history of conducting intelligence operations 
against the United States. Applicant should not be placed in a position where she might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Taiwan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(d), and 7(e) all require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” 
The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a 
relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
A “heightened risk” is not raised by the nature of the government of Taiwan, 
because of its history as an ally of the United States, its positive human rights record, 
and its democratic traditions. However, Taiwan’s industries have been known to target 
sensitive information and technology in the United States and many other industrialized 
countries. Taiwan intelligence agencies have engaged in espionage against the United 
States as recently as five to seven years ago. Taiwan intelligence agencies have 
specifically targeted U.S. citizens, including government employees, in the past for 
sensitive and classified information.  
 
In the last 12 months, two Appeal Board decisions reversed administrative judge 
decisions granting security clearances for applicants with Taiwan connections. In ISCR 
Case No. 08-04488 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 23, 2009), the Appeal Board emphasized that 
Taiwan is “an active collector of industrial information and a user of industrial espionage 
techniques.” The Appeal Board determined In ISCR Case No. 08-04488 that the 
applicant’s frequent communications with two relatives living in Taiwan raised AG ¶ 
7(a).  Similarly, in ISCR Case No. 08-09211 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2010), the Appeal 
Board held that the connections between the applicant and relatives in Taiwan were 
sufficient to establish AG ¶ 7(a) as a concern.    
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Taiwan seek or have 
sought sensitive or economic information from or through Applicant, her spouse, or their 
family members living in Taiwan, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in Taiwan, and the possibility 
that she or most likely her husband will return to Taiwan, create a potential conflict of 
interest. Her relationship with her husband is sufficiently close to raise a trustworthiness 
concern about her desire to assist her spouse (who plans to move to Taiwan), or S (who 
now lives in Taiwan) should they be endangered or induced by criminals or other family 
members into providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel 
produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with S, who is living in Taiwan, 
and Applicant’s spouse’s plan to retire in Taiwan. This evidence raises the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or inducements, increasing the possibility of attempted 
exploitation. Applicant has a substantial interest in a condominium in Taiwan that she 
purchased in the 1970s. She values her interest at about $75,000, and her husband’s 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
interest in the condominium at about $75,000. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to Taiwan three 
times between 1990 and the end of September 2008. Although she may have traveled 
to Taiwan after September 2008, I do not hold this possibility against her because there 
is insufficient evidence of a fourth trip to Taiwan. See n. 3, supra. Applicant continues to 
have frequent contact with S, who lives in Taiwan. However, she does not have 
frequent contacts with her other siblings or her mother, who are living in Taiwan. Her 
relationships with her other siblings and mother who are living in Taiwan are mitigated 
under AG ¶ 8(c) because her contacts and communications with them are so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that they could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. However, because of her connections to Taiwan, and to S, 
Applicant is not able to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that 
[her relationships with her relatives who are Taiwan citizens] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”    
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has strong 
family connections to the United States. Her spouse and two children live in the United 
States and are all U.S. citizens. Applicant owns two houses in the United States. She 
has substantial investments and bank accounts in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationship to S, who lives in Taiwan. She 
frequently communicates with S. There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, 
criminals, the Taiwan Government, or those conducting espionage have approached or 
threatened Applicant or her family to coerce them to obtain sensitive information from 
Applicant. There is strong evidence that two of her siblings living in Taiwan have made 
death threats against Applicant and her husband. She has not informed law 
enforcement of the threats. Nevertheless, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or 
Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or 
exploitation by the Taiwan government. While the government does not have any 
burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence were present, 
Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign 
influence trustworthiness concerns.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Taiwan. Applicant is not required 
to report her contacts with family members living in Taiwan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies to mitigate the trustworthiness concern raised by her property 
interest in Taiwan. In comparison to her property interests in the United States, and her 
employment in the United States, the value of her property in Taiwan is such that it is 
unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, 
or pressure her. However, this mitigating condition can only fully mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
The SOR does not list a trustworthiness concern relating to Applicant’s 
husband’s plan to retire in Taiwan, or her plan to use her TIC to avoid Taiwan’s taxes 
when she sells her condominium. These non-SOR listed elements are not considered in 
the analysis of Guideline B, but will be addressed in the Whole Person Concept section, 
infra.    
 
 In sum, the primary foreign influence trustworthiness concern is Applicant’s close 
relationship with S as shown by their frequent communications with each other. S lives 
in Taiwan and could be used to subject Applicant to coercion or inducements. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for assignment to a public trust position by considering the totality of 
the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
assignment to a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1985 or 1986. She received her bachelor’s 
degree in the United States. In 1999 or 2000, she became a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s 
spouse also became a U.S. citizen. Her two children were born in the Taiwan, have 
lived in the United States for most of their lives, and are now U.S. citizens.  
 
Applicant has substantial property and employment connections to the United 
States. She owns U.S. real estate valued at about $800,000. Her 401(k) is valued at 
about $250,000. She has several hundred thousand dollars in U.S. bank accounts. She 
intends to remain in the United States, even if her husband retires in Taiwan. She is 
strong willed and able to resist pressure as shown by her determined refusal to 
succumb to the pressure of some of her siblings to relinquish her share of her father’s 
estate.  
 
Applicant does not have frequent contacts with most of her siblings, who live in 
Taiwan. She no longer has frequent contacts with her mother. There is no derogatory 
information concerning her police or financial records. She has never been fired from a 
job. There is no evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, illegal drug possession or 
use, or alcohol-related incidents.   
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information are more significant than the factors weighing towards grant of her 
clearance at this time. In September 2008, she went to Taiwan to visit her father, who 
was dying. Later in September 2008 after she left Taiwan, her father died. On October 
16, 2008, she obtained a Taiwan passport because it would help her obtain a Taiwan 
Identification Card (TIC). On August 31, 2009, she responded to the SOR, which 
contained an allegation that she intended to apply for a TIC. In October 2009, she 
obtained a TIC because she wanted to obtain her share of her inheritance, and possibly 
to avoid some Taiwanese taxes. She retained her Taiwan citizenship to protect her 
interests in her Taiwan property. Her TIC shows her residence as her Taiwan 
condominium, rather than her address in the United States. Although she continues to 
 
16 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
retain a substantial interest in a condominium in Taiwan, this interest is clearly 
outweighed by her investments in the United States. There is no established preference 
for Taiwan over the United States. 
 
Applicant’s sister, S, lives in Taiwan, and Applicant has frequent communications 
with S. Applicant’s spouse intends to retire in Taiwan, and Applicant has a close 
relationship with her spouse. She traveled to Taiwan most recently in 2006 and 
September 2008. She has an interest valued at about $75,000 in a condominium in 
Taiwan. She intends to sell her interest in the Taiwan condominium and use her TIC to 
mislead Taiwan tax officials into believing she is a resident of Taiwan.      
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Taiwan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Taiwan, as well as the dangers existing in Taiwan.6 The danger 
of violence or coercion from terrorists in Taiwan and the threat of coercion from the 
Taiwan government are relatively low. There is a greater risk that Taiwan intelligence 
agencies would induce cooperation, as opposed to the use of threats and coercion, to 
obtain sensitive information.        
 
After weighing all the facts and circumstances in this decision, including 
Applicant’s demeanor, sincerity, and honesty at her hearing, I conclude she has 
mitigated the foreign preference concern; however, she has not mitigated the foreign 
influence trustworthiness concern. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”7 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for 
access to a public trust position. 
 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
7See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
17 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a(1) to 1.a(3): For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
   
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
   
