                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02745 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Janet Horgan, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 29, 2008, Applicant submitted her electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On September 30, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 20, 2009. Applicant requested 
her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
On November 13, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on November 13, 2009. She was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
November 20, 2009. Applicant’s attorney filed a Response to the FORM on December 
15, 2009, within the 30 day time allowed that would have expired on December 20, 
2009. I received the case assignment on January 29, 2010. Based upon a review of the 
complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all allegations in Paragraph 1, except Subparagraphs 1.g and 
1.i, which she admitted. (Item 4)  
 
Applicant is 51 years old, married, and has worked for a defense contractor since 
1981. She has held a security clearance for 27 of the 28 years she worked for the 
contractor. She and her husband own a house, two cars, and a $40,000 motorcycle. 
(Items 5 and 6) 
 
Applicant’s husband changed jobs in 2002 to start work in construction. His 
income decreased by half of what he earned previously as a result of that change. Their 
expenditures and debts remained the same or increased from 2002 to 2004. Her 
husband was injured in 2003 while working. He later returned to work. In early 2009, 
Applicant sought to sell her house, but the current status of that sale is not disclosed by 
Applicant in her Answer or FORM Response. The government investigator’s summary 
of the interview with Applicant in January 2009 states that Applicant and her husband 
were separated but not divorced. Her FORM Response does not make any mention of a 
marital separation or divorce. As a result of her spending habits from 2002 to 2009, 
Applicant has 11 delinquent debts totaling $49,160 that were alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant admitted to the government investigator that she did not change her spending 
habits for several years after 2003. (Items 1 and 6, FORM Response) 
 
Applicant consulted with a company in 2006 which purported to assist her in 
paying her delinquent debts. She paid the company $100 to $200 per month for an 
unspecified time. Applicant did not submit a copy of any agreement with the company, 
including a list of the debts it intended to resolve for her. The company did not repay 
any of her debts. She later terminated any connection with that company, but did not 
submit documents showing when that disconnection occurred. Applicant did not consult 
with any other debt resolution company after 2006. (Items 6 and FORM Response) 
 
Applicant’s financial records in the file, comprised of three credit reports from 
December 4, 2008 (Item 9), March 23, 2009 (Item 8), and July 30, 2009 (Item 7), show 
she had 10 credit cards between 2000 and 2009. She used some of them to purchase 
 
 
 
 
 
3
household items and groceries. She used the credit card alleged in Subparagraph 1.j of 
the SOR to pay other delinquent debts. (Item 6) 
 
Three of Applicant’s delinquent debts were repaid after the creditors obtained 
judgments against Applicant and used garnishment procedures under state law for 
collections. These debts total $30,192. One of these debts was for a credit card in the 
amount of $2,269 and the judgment was granted in December 2007 (SOR 
Subparagraph 1.a.). The second debt was for another credit card in the amount of 
$7,249, for which a judgment was granted in July 2007 (SOR Subparagraph 1.b). The 
third debt was her house mortgage in the amount of $20,674 (SOR Subparagraph 1.c). 
These three debts were paid in 2009. (Items 4, 7-9, FORM Response) 
 
 Applicant has eight delinquent debts, which are unresolved. They total $18,968. 
They are set forth in SOR Subparagraphs 1.d. to 1.k. These debts are credit card debts 
incurred between 2002 and 2009. (Items 4, 6-9) 
 
Applicant stated in her FORM Response that the debts in Subparagraph 1.e. and 
1.h. were to be settled and she was waiting for the creditors to send her installment 
payment agreements. She did not submit any documents to show agreements were 
reached with these creditors or that she made any payments. (Items 4, 6-9) 
 
Applicant claims the delinquent debts set for in Subparagraph 1.j. is the same as 
the debt in Subparagraph 1.b, which is the judgment collected through a garnishment. 
She also claims the debt in Subparagraph 1.k. is the same as the debt in Subparagraph 
1.c. I compared all the account numbers, the judgment file numbers, the amounts, and 
reviewed the three credit reports contained in the file. I conclude they are not the same 
debts nor are they subsumed or part of the judgments in each case. (Items 4, 6-9) 
 
Concerning the department store credit card debt in Subparagraph 1.i., Applicant 
claims it has a balance in December 2009, of $446.82 with a $55 payment past due. 
Applicant did not submit any persuasive evidence that this debt was being paid regularly 
each month. The previous payment was $114 in October 2009. None of the eight debts 
described above are resolved. (Items 4, 6-9) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating any applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating any applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
 
 
 
 
 
4
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 
 
 
 
5
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Of these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2002 to the present, Applicant accumulated 11 delinquent debts for a total 
of $49,160 that were unpaid or unresolved. Applicant’s three debts that were paid were 
done only after judgments were obtained against her and her wages garnished. 
Applicant was unable to satisfy those debts except through court actions taken by 
creditors against her. She has a seven year history of not meeting her financial 
obligations. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three mitigating conditions may be 
potentially applicable.  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the change of employment by her husband seven 
years ago was shown by Applicant to have had a substantial effect on her ability to 
repay her debts. However, Applicant’s husband voluntarily changed his employment. He 
took a job that paid him half of what he earned in his previous job. Applicant and her 
husband did not alter their spending habits after their income decreased. They did not 
act responsibly under the circumstances. She failed to meet her burden of proof on that 
issue and the mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
I considered the mitigating condition pertaining to financial or debt counseling 
(AG ¶ 20 (c)), but did not find it applicable because Applicant did not submit any 
documentary evidence concerning her alleged counseling. Whatever counseling she 
received, it obviously was not efficacious. 
 
I also considered the good-faith effort to repay creditor mitigating condition (AG ¶ 
20 (d)). It is not applicable because Applicant had to be sued by three creditors, who 
then had to use the garnishment of her wages to collect on the judgments. Resolving 
debts through garnishment does not demonstrate a good-faith effort to pay debts. She 
also failed to meet her burden of proof on this mitigating condition because she did not 
provide any persuasive documentation that the eight remaining debts were being 
resolved in any way. Her FORM Response seemed designed to obfuscate rather than 
elucidate the status of the debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the “whole-person concept”, the administrative judge must evaluate any 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She has not taken any voluntary action to resolve her delinquent 
debts. Instead, the evidence shows that judgments had to be entered against her to 
collect the money owed to three creditors. She has done nothing clearly designed to 
resolve the other eight debts. There is no plan articulated to resolve these debts in the 
future. This inaction leaves her vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress 
based on the magnitude of her financial obligation. Her lack of action continues to this 
day, and is obviously voluntary. Her inaction will continue based on her past 
performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, 
she exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment or reliability by failing to make 
 
 
 
 
 
7
payments on any of her delinquent debts during at least the past five years since 2004 
when her husband returned to work from his injury. She has worked for the government 
for 27 years and has held a security clearance for most of those years, indicating that 
she has gone through the process in the past and should be aware of the Government’s 
concerns with delinquent debts. Applicant has nearly $19,000 in delinquent debt 
continuing to be owed and unresolved by any repayment method. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
