 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.09-03766 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Shawn J. Coppins, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record as a whole, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On April 13, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 
29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on or about October 13, 2009, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
December 10, 2009, and issued a Notice of Hearing setting the hearing for January 7, 
2010. On that date, the government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through Q into evidence without objection. The record remained open until January 22, 
2010, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit copies of some of his exhibits, which he 
timely did. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 19, 2010.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. The request and the attached documents pertinent to 
Iraq are included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through VI (Tr. 17-20). 
Applicant did not object to my consideration of those Hearing Exhibits. The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge, and matters 
pertinent to Iraq, and not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively 
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.c of the SOR.   
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He was born in southern Iraq. He attended high school 
and undergraduate college there. In June 1972, he received a medical degree with a 
radiology specialty and then completed two years of mandatory military service in May 
1975. He subsequently practiced medicine in a public clinic in the morning and worked 
at his private clinic in the afternoon. (Tr. 35, 79.)  
 
 In 1995, Applicant, his wife, and three children, now ages 30, 27, and 22, fled 
Iraq to escape Saddam Hussein’s regime and potential interrogation. (Tr. 30.) They 
lived in Country One for four years before receiving refugee status and arriving in the 
United States in 1999. (Tr. 81.) In May 2006, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. His 
wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2005. His son and one daughter 
became U.S. citizens in February 2006, and the other daughter in December 2007. Two 
of his children have graduated from U.S. universities and his other child is completing 
her degree. His wife does not work outside of the home. Applicant speaks English and 
Arabic. None of his family members have returned to Iraq. (Tr. 99.) 
 
 After arriving in the United States in 1999, Applicant has held various positions. 
He has worked as a case worker, an interpreter, and a director of a youth project. He 
was unemployed from September 2001 until December 2002, while he attended college 
full-time and pursued a degree as a medical sonographer. (GE 1.) He subsequently 
 
 
 
 
3
became licensed and worked in hospitals from January 2003 to March 2007, when he 
obtained a position with a defense contractor. (GE 1.)  
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born and raised in Iraq. They are deceased. His 
father owned a large shoe business before his death. His mother was a homemaker. 
(Tr. 84; 96.) 
 
 Applicant is one of six children, all born in Iraq. Applicant has one brother and 
four sisters, all of whom are citizens and residents of Iraq. Applicant’s brother is a high 
school teacher for a public school. One of Applicant’s sisters is a pharmacy professor at 
an Iraqi university. (Tr. 35.) Another sister works as a bookkeeper for an oil company. 
(Tr. 36.) His third sister is a soil physicist. (Id.) His fourth sister is a clerk for a company 
that builds public projects. (Tr. 37.) Three of his brothers-in-laws are deceased; the 
other brother-in-law is a retired civil engineer. (Tr. 89.) All of his siblings have some 
connection to the Iraqi government because it is the primary employer for all citizens. 
None of the agencies or institutions that employ his siblings is involved with public 
policy. (Tr. 86.) 
 
 Applicant did not have any communication with his siblings after he left Iraq in 
1995 until it was liberated in 2003. At that time, he telephoned his siblings to inform 
them that he was alive and living in the United States. (Tr. 33; 37; 85.) From 2003 to 
2007, he had limited telephone contact with them because Iraq had poor 
communication technology. Since starting his position in May 2007, he calls his brother 
and one sister every two to three months. (Tr. 86.) He has not spoken to the other two 
sisters for more than a year. (Tr. 86.) His siblings do not know that he works in Iraq. (Tr. 
85.) He has not seen any of them since he left in 1995. (Tr. 85.) 
 
 In May 2007, Applicant returned to Iraq for the first time since leaving the country 
in 1995. He was deployed as a bilingual/bicultural advisor to the U.S. troops, using his 
medical background and language skills in the base’s hospital. (Tr. 47.) While working 
there, he does not use his birth name, but is referred to as Dr. [x] for security reasons. 
He does not want anyone knowing his real name “because this is very dangerous for 
my siblings, for my family in Iraq.” (Tr. 39.) He does not want his family targeted by 
terrorists. (Id.) He has worked there for the past two-and-a-half years and returns home 
every four to six months for two week intervals. (Tr. 99.) He held an interim clearance 
for a period of time. (Tr. 8.) 
 
 In 1992, Applicant purchased a vacant piece of property located in a village 
outside an Iraqi city’s limits for $30,000. Due to his ethnicity, he was not permitted to 
own property within the city boundaries. (Tr. 42-44.) After he fled the country, he 
assumed the property was confiscated by the government. (Tr. 43.) While in Iraq in 
2007, he learned that the property is vacant. It is now worth $10,000 or less. (Tr. 44.) 
He has not visited the property while living in Iraq because he is not permitted to leave 
the base. (Tr. 45.). He does not know what to do about the property. He would like to 
sell it, but does not believe he will be able to do so. He is not particularly concerned 
about it. (Tr. 90-91.) He has no other financial interests in Iraq. (Tr. 92.) 
 
 
 
 
4
 
 Applicant owns two houses in the United States, one purchased for $206,000 
and another recently purchased for $230,000. (Tr. 90-91.) There is no derogatory 
information concerning his police or financial records. He has never been fired from a 
job. He has never been arrested. He has never used illegal drugs or been involved in an 
alcohol-related incident. (GE 1.) There is no evidence in the record that Applicant 
breached any security policies or procedures while holding an interim security clearance 
in Iraq.  
 
 Applicant submitted five letters, seven Certificates of Appreciation, and several 
performance evaluations, attesting to his capabilities and contributions in providing 
health support services for Operation Iraqi Freedom. Applicant’s Commanding Officer 
from October 2007 to February 2008 wrote, “Of all the people that I have worked with, 
[Applicant] possesses some of the highest values, morals, and integrity that I have ever 
encountered in a human being.” (AE I.) The Program Manager for the base’s operation 
support and services stated, “Physicians like [Applicant] serve to bridge the gap 
between the American Doctors and the Iraqi patients utilizing both medical and cultural 
experiences; making the management, follow-up and movement of those Iraqi patients 
easier and safer.” (AE H.) A lieutenant colonel who worked with Applicant from January 
to July 2009, as the Chief of the Medical Staff, commented that Applicant “is a truly 
remarkable individual who is very dedicated to the United States and the mission of the 
Department of Defense in Iraq.” (AE J.) A major and a colonel signed a letter of 
recommendation for Applicant, stating that Applicant “has demonstrated the core values 
that the Air Force holds in the highest regard: Integrity First, Service before Self and 
Excellence in All Things.” (AE K.) An administrator for the Dental Group at the base, a 
lieutenant colonel, recommends that Applicant receive a security clearance. She worked 
with him from January through May 2008. “I would be quite comfortable, putting my life 
in his hands if a situation were to require such measures . . .  I wish we had more 
people like [Applicant] who would be willing to serve.” (AE P.) All of Applicant’s 
performance evaluations predominantly rate him as “Exceeds Requirements.” (AE D.) 
 
 Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted pride in his U.S. citizenship at the 
hearing. He is very dedicated and enthusiastic about his ability to serve as a cultural 
advisor to the U.S. military in an area that he described as “the most targeted base, 
American base in Iraq.” (Tr. 45; 98.)  
 
Iraq 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s 
new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains 
engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. 
Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, 
and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (HE I, V, VI.) 
 
 
 
 
5
I also take administrative notice of the fact that the northern area of Iraq, 
occupied by the Kurdish people, has had a functioning democratic form of government 
for approximately ten years. It is more stable, appreciative of the support of the United 
States, and more friendly to the presence of the United States forces than other parts of 
Iraq. (HE I, III.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
 
 
 
 
6
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern, three of 
which may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Applicant has contact and connections with his brother and four sisters, who are 
residents and citizens of Iraq. He acknowledged that these relationships potentially 
create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because terrorists 
in Iraq seek intelligence that is hostile to the U. S. interests. Applicant’s relationship with 
his siblings also creates a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and [his] desire to help” his family living in 
Iraq. He also owns a piece of property in Iraq, estimated to be valued at $10,000. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these three potentially disqualifying conditions.  
  
  After the government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. Four Foreign 
Influence mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the 
disqualifying conditions based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
In the event terrorists would learn of Applicant’s identity and presence in Iraq, his 
siblings could be placed in positions that would force him to choose between them and 
U.S. interests. However, the possibility of that conflict occurring is diminished by several 
factors: Applicant has limited communication with his five siblings; he does not disclose 
his last name at work; he does not visit them; and they do not know that he works in 
Iraq.  Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has some application.   
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. He and his immediate family members have lived in the 
United States since 1999. He attended school here. He worked at various jobs for 
 
 
 
 
8
seven years before obtaining his current position. His wife and three children are 
naturalized U.S. citizens, residing here. He owns substantial property in the United 
States. In contrast, his financial interests in Iraq are negligible. There is no evidence that 
he has connections or contact with people living in Iraq other than his five family 
members. He expressed a strong sense of loyalty to the United States and zeal for his 
job. His supervisors, who have worked in close contact with him in a combat zone, 
consider him to be an ethical and dedicated man, who is a valuable asset to the U.S. 
War on Terror. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) has some application to the security concerns raised, as Applicant’s 
contacts with his five siblings are generally infrequent and casual. He telephones his 
two siblings every two or three months. He speaks to his other three siblings less 
frequently. He has not seen any of them since 1995.  
 
In 1992, Applicant purchased a piece of vacant property that now has an 
estimated value of $10,000. That amount of money is insignificant compared to his U.S. 
properties that total over $400,000. He believed for many years that the Iraqi property 
was confiscated by the government. Other than being aware that he still has property 
rights, given his statement that he is not concerned about the vacant parcel, it is unlikely 
that any threat to confiscate the land would cause him concern or conflict. AG ¶ 8(f) is 
applicable.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his 
[or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
 
 
 
9
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although this case pertains to 
Guideline B, the security concerns do not arise from any questionable conduct by 
Applicant, but rather circumstances that warrant further analysis. First, there is a 
significant risk of terrorism and various human rights abuses in Iraq. More importantly 
for security purposes, terrorists in Iraq are hostile to the United States and actively seek 
classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could attempt to use 
Applicant’s siblings to obtain such information. Second, he had numerous connections 
to Iraq before he immigrated to the United States in 1999. Following his birth, he spent 
his formative years there. He was educated at an Iraqi university and practiced 
medicine for twenty years in both public and private clinics. Third, five siblings remain 
residents and citizens of Iraq. Fourth, he maintains some contact with these family 
members and carefully monitors disclosure of his last name to provide security for them.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 11 years, and 
has been a naturalized citizen since 2006. His spouse has been living in the United 
States since 1999 and is also a naturalized citizen, as are his three Iraqi-born children, 
now adults. He owns property here, worth more than $400,000. In his current 
employment, he provides vital and direct support to the U.S. Armed Forces as a cultural 
and medical advisor. After leaving Iraq in 1995, he did not return until May 2007, when 
he was deployed there. His ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to 
family members living in Iraq. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action 
that could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United 
States seriously. He has worked diligently for a defense contractor for several years in 
an important capacity. He jeopardizes his physical safety while working in Iraq. His 
supervisors assess him as loyal, trustworthy, conscientious, and responsible, giving him 
excellent evaluations and praising his dedication to the cause of freedom in Iraq. Since 
returning to Iraq in 2007 with the U.S. military, he has not had any physical contact with 
his family. There is no derogatory information about him in the record.  
 
Applicant has held an interim security clearance during his work with the U.S. 
Armed Forces without any indication that he breached security policies or procedures. 
While that fact is not normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the 
Appeal Board noted in ISCR Case No. 05-03846 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006) as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
 
 
 
 
10
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s 
assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report a 
foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.2 Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                             
         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
2 I conclude that the whole-person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security clearance. 
Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions articulated under 
AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole-person analysis standing 
alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
