 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-03411 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on April 24, 2007 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 4). On September 4, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F 
and E (GX 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on September 9, 2009; answered it on October 2, 
2009 (GX 3); and requested determination on the record without a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted the government’s written case on November 4, 2009. On November 
6, 2009, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, 
who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on 
November 18, 2009, but he did not respond. The case was assigned to me on January 
19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f, but he denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a that he falsified his security 
clearance application. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. At the time he 
submitted his security clearance application, he was a petty officer first class (pay grade 
E-6) in the U.S. Navy and had served on active duty since June 1988. He has since 
retired. He received a security clearance in March 2002.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application, he answered “no” 
to question 28a, asking if he had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debt 
during the last seven years, and question 28b, asking if he was currently more than 90 
days delinquent on any debt. His credit report dated May 1, 2007, reflected the six 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f (GX 5). The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
placed for collection in April 2007. All the other debts were placed for collection or 
charged off between November 2003 and June 2005. The six delinquent debts total 
about $37,780. All the debts alleged in the SOR are reflected as unresolved in 
Applicant’s credit report dated November 4, 2009 (GX 8). 
 
 Applicant was married in September 1990 and divorced in August 2000. He 
remarried in February 2006. When Applicant and his first wife were divorced, they 
agreed to resolve the joint debts accumulated during the marriage, but they did not 
allocate responsibility for each debt. After his ex-wife filed for bankruptcy in 2005, the 
creditors sought to collect from Applicant (GX 8 at 8).  
 
 The $2,836 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, the $12,945 debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, the 
$5,876 debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, and the $15,556 debt in SOR ¶ 1.f were loans cosigned by 
Applicant and his ex-wife. The $427 debt in SOR ¶ 1.b was a joint cell phone account. 
The $140 debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was for an unreturned cable box. During an interview in 
June 2007, Applicant told a security investigator he returned the cable box and that the 
bill was satisfied in full (GX 8 at 8), but in his answer to the SOR, he admitted the debt 
(GX 3 at 2; GX 8 at 8-9).  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied falsifying his application. He stated 
he had not received any documentation about the debts and did not think about them 
 3
when he completed the application. He also stated he submitted his application at a 
time when he was distracted by his impending retirement from the Navy and 
preparations for his squadron’s deployment (GX 3 at 4).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 4
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are raised by the evidence: AG 
¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations), shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are numerous and have persisted until the present. The circumstances 
under which they were accumulated make them unlikely to recur, because Applicant is 
divorced and there is no indication that his current marriage is in distress or that he has 
incurred significant financial problems during his current marriage. His failure to take 
meaningful action to resolve the delinquent debts for which he is liable raises doubt 
about his reliability and trustworthiness. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
 5
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s marital break-up was a circumstance 
beyond his control. If his ex-wife reneged on any informal agreement to share the 
marital debts, her conduct also would have been beyond his control. However, the 
second prong of AG ¶ (b) (“acted responsibly”) is not met because Applicant has taken 
no meaningful action to resolve his financial liabilities. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not applicable because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
sought or received financial counseling. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition is not established 
because Applicant has taken no meaningful action to resolve the debts. 
 
Finally, security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). 
Applicant disputed the cable box debt in a security interview in June 2007, but he has 
since admitted the debt. This mitigating condition is not applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire). When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 6
 Applicant was not a neophyte in the security clearance process. He received a 
clearance in March 2002 and held it throughout his Navy service. He knew he and his 
ex-wife had accumulated considerable debt during their marriage, and he knew she had 
filed for bankruptcy instead of resolving a share of the debts. He told a security 
investigator that creditors began contacting him after his ex-wife filed for bankruptcy in 
2005, two years before he submitted his current application. After considering all the 
evidence, I find Applicant’s explanation implausible and not credible. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(a) is raised. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has held a clearance for many years. He served 
in the Navy 20 years. He recognizes his legal liability on the joint debts incurred during 
his first marriage, but he has not provided evidence of meaningful efforts to resolve 
those debts. He was not candid about his debts on his security clearance application, 
and his after-the-fact explanation for not disclosing his debts was implausible and not 
credible. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F 
and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 7
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
