 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-02975 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to financial 
considerations. She has mitigated personal conduct concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application, Standard Form (SF) 86, 
on April 23, 2007. The signature page attached to this SF-86 bears the date of March 
28, 2007. On April 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F 
(financial considerations) and E (personal conduct) for Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 26, 2009, and requested a 
hearing. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 28, 2009, and I 
received the case assignment on July 30, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
August 21, 2009, scheduling the hearing for September 23, 2009. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were received without objection, and she testified on her own behalf. I held the 
record open until September 29, 2009, to afford the Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional documents. Applicant subsequently submitted AE D through F, 
which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
October 7, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted with explanations all of the SOR allegations except SOR ¶ 
1.j., which she denied, and SOR ¶ 1.k., which she did not respond to. At the onset of 
her hearing, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.k. Tr. 13-14. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old prospective “networthiness specialist,” who seeks to 
reinstate her security clearance to qualify for employment with a defense contractor. 
Tr. 50-51. She successfully held a security clearance from approximately 1994 to 
2009, a period of 15 years. She was initially granted a security clearance while on 
active duty in the U.S. Army, discussed infra. Tr. 17, 20-24.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1977. Tr. 20. She was awarded a 
Bachelor of Science Degree in Management and Human Resources in January 1992.  
She attended another university from January 2002 to January 2004 and earned 
approximately 90 hours towards a degree in Human Relations, but did not graduate. 
Tr. 17-20. She served in the Army on active duty from March 1994 to March 1998, and 
was honorably discharged as a Specialist 4 (pay grade E-4), with a Military 
Occupational Specialty of 31R (Mobile Subscriber Equipment Operator). Tr. 24-26. 
 
Applicant was previously married three times. Her most recent marriage was 
from January 1998 to May 2006. She could not recall the dates of her two previous 
marriages at her hearing. All marriages ended by divorce. Applicant has no 
dependents. Tr. 26-27, GE 1. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial history and 
current situation. It included the review of her April 2007 SF-86; her April 2007, May 
 
3 
 
 
2008, November 2008, July 2009 credit reports; and her July 2008 Response to 
Interrogatories. GE 1 – 6.  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 11 separate financial line items. Her SOR 
documents a history of financial difficulties that began as early as 1992 when she filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) Applicant testified her indebtedness at the 
time she filed bankruptcy was due to her “bad money management.” Tr. 28. Applicant 
did not identify any potential financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
20 at the time she filed bankruptcy in 1992, discussed infra. Tr. 28-30. 
 
The remaining allegations consist of ten different debts, i.e., charged off credit 
card debt of $9,088 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); charged off credit card of $7,724 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); 
charged off credit card of $3,749 (SOR ¶ 1.d.); credit card collection account of 
$17,770 (SOR ¶ 1.e.); credit card collection account of $5,615 (SOR ¶ 1.f.); credit card 
collection account of $14,809 (SOR ¶ 1.g.); credit card collection account of $6,824 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.); credit card collection account of $9,300 (SOR ¶ 1.i.); collection account 
of $6,038 (SOR ¶ 1.j.); and cell phone collection account of $48 (SOR ¶ 1.k.) The total 
indebtedness alleged against Applicant is $80,965. 
 
Applicant was unable to state with any degree of certainty whether the debts 
alleged were the original creditor(s) or which debts had been purchased or transferred 
to a credit collection company. She did not provide any documentation clarifying the 
debt status with the possible exception of two payments discussed infra. The majority 
of these debts became delinquent in the approximate time-frame of 2003. Tr. 30-38, 
53-56. When queried about the nature of these debts, she responded they were for 
“[e]verything except living expenses.” Tr. 31, 32, 35. Applicant testified in 2003 she 
was stationed with her ex-husband in Germany and was underemployed at the Post 
Exchange as a sales associate from January 2003 to May 2005. All debts alleged 
belong to Applicant. Tr. 33, 44-45, 53-54, GE 1, p. 3. Applicant testified she worked at 
the Post Exchange “maybe 30” hours a week and “was probably making $10 an hour.” 
Tr. 44. 
 
After returning from Germany, Applicant’s SF-86 reflects that she was 
unemployed from May 2005 to August 2005; that she was employed as an account 
manager from August 2005 to March 2006; that she was unemployed from April 2006 
to November 2006, that she was employed as a retail sales associate from November 
2006 to March 2007, and that she was employed as a business analyst for a defense 
contractor beginning in March 2007. She quit her job as a retail sales associate to 
start her job with a defense contractor in March 2007, and was laid off from her 
defense contractor job in February 2009. Tr. 45, 51, GE 1. 
 
In her Response to Interrogatories, Applicant indicated that she “spoke to a 
budget analyst” on Post at some point in 2007, but did not offer evidence that she had 
participated in or completed financial counseling. GE 4. In any event, there is no 
evidence her financial problems are resolved or under control. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant did offer some evidence that she paid $25 in September 2009 
towards one of the credit collection companies, most likely one of the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f., but was unable to establish which debt the payment applied to. 
Tr. 37-41, AE A. Applicant testified she paid by debit card the $48 debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.k. Applicant submitted two letters dated September 21, 2009 to two different 
creditors in which she purports to have sent $25 towards paying down her debts. 
Again, she is unable to identify with any degree of certainty which of the alleged debts 
these payments apply to. Tr. 39-42, AE B, AE C. 
 
Applicant’s June 2008 Personal Financial Statement (PFS) reflected that she 
had $35,000 in savings and a net monthly remainder of $820. At the time, she was 
working as a defense contractor. Since being laid off, she has been drawing 
unemployment and her September 2009 PFS reflects $9,000 in savings and a net 
monthly remainder of negative $465. Tr. 48-49, AE F. 
 
Applicant described her plan to achieve financial responsibility: 
 
My plan is to talk to CCCS and see if they can help me. The conundrum 
is I can’t afford to set up a plan that’s going to cost me $500 a month 
unless I have the security clearance and a job. And it sounds like you’re 
not going to give me a security clearance so I can get a job unless I’m 
doing that. Tr. 57. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant answered “No” to questions 28.a. and 28.b. on her April 23, 2007 SF-
86 (asking whether in last seven years she had been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debts); and (asking whether she was currently over 90 days delinquents on any 
debts), respectively. She did not list any debts on this SF-86. GE 1. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a., 
2.b.) 
 
Applicant testified that she answered “Yes” to questions 28.a and 28.b when 
completing her original March 2007 SF-86. Referring to the time she completed her 
SF-86, she stated, “. . . I am definitely 180 days delinquent and if I’m 180 days 
delinquent it seems to me that yes that means I’m definitely 90 degree – 90 days.” Tr. 
64. 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted what she purported to be her original SF-86, 
which was dated March 27, 2007. On that SF-86, she did, indeed, check “Yes” to 
questions 28.a and 28.b. Tr. 63-64, AE E. I accept this document as authentic and 
unaltered. 
 
Recommendations 
 
Applicant did not submit any character or reference letters nor did she submit 
any work-related references.  
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
6 
 
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her answers 
to DOHA interrogatories, her SOR response, and statement at her hearing. The 
government established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 
20(e) are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I am only able to give Applicant 
partial credit under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) and conclude that none of the remaining 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant was divorced in May 2006. Applicant submitted 
evidence of at least three periods of unemployment, i.e., May 2005 to August 2005, 
April 2006 to November 2006, and February 2009 to present. However, the majority of 
her debts became delinquent in 2003 when she was employed and married to her 
former husband. Applicant is unable to demonstrate her current financial situation is 
sufficiently attributable to those events. In September 2009, Applicant submitted some 
evidence of modest payments and attempts to contact her creditors. The majority of 
her debts remained unaddressed for six years until recently when the government 
identified them as a security concern. In short, her recent efforts can best be 
described as too little, too late. As noted, Applicant was unable to identify with any 
degree of certainty which of the alleged debts these payments apply to. To conclude, 
Applicant’s sparse favorable information fails to raise full applicability of any of the 
mitigating conditions. 
 
Based on the available evidence, her financial problems are recent, not 
isolated, and it is unclear whether they will be a concern in the future. Applicant has 
not carried her burden of proving her financial responsibility. Her overall financial 
behavior casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
1 See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are 
considered as a whole. 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false 
security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
In April 2007, Applicant submitted an SF-86 that asked questions about past 
and current indebtedness, noted supra. Applicant was able to clear up discrepancies 
pertaining to alleged falsifications by submission of her original SF-86 post-hearing. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct 
security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  Applicant credibly stated when she completed her SF-86 that she checked the 
blocks “Yes” to questions 28.a. and 28.b. regarding past indebtedness. Post-hearing 
she submitted her original SF-86 dated April 27, 2007, which corroborated her 
testimony. 
 
She was candid and forthright at her hearing about her past indebtedness. I 
conclude Applicant’s alleged falsifications were not intentional and AG ¶ 17(f) fully 
applies. The falsification allegations are not substantiated. I am satisfied she did not 
deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose her past indebtedness during the security 
clearance application process with the intent to deceive.2  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
2The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
10 
 
 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
The comments under Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct in the 
Analysis section, supra, are incorporated in the Whole Person Concept. Applicant’s 
lack of financial responsibility spanned a minimum of six years from 2003 to 2009. 
With the exception of one small debt, the remainder of her debts remain unaddressed 
or their status remains uncertain. Concerns over Applicant’s alleged falsification of her 
SF-86 were mitigated by submission of post-hearing documentation. 
 
Applicant receives substantial credit for her four years of active duty and 
subsequent work in the defense contractor industry. She successfully held a security 
clearance for approximately 15 years. Aside from the SOR allegations, no other 
disciplinary or security-related problems surfaced. Her record of military service and 
employment weighs in her favor. There is a definite dichotomy between how Applicant 
handled her financial affairs and her work-related performance. I am convinced that 
she is loyal to her country.   
 
  Although Applicant was able to mitigate falsification concerns, she was unable 
to mitigate financial considerations concerns. Given her current situation of being 
unemployed and her significant unresolved debt, it is unlikely she will be able to attain 
financial responsibility in the near future. It is unfortunate that she allowed her debts to 
accumulate and more unfortunate that she was unable or unwilling to address her 
debts when she was in a position to do so. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude she has mitigated personal conduct concerns, but has not 
mitigated financial considerations concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude she is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.k.:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. to 2.b.:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
