  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02963 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed five past due, charged-off, or placed for collection accounts, 
which totaled approximately $28,000. He paid two of the debts and is making payments 
on the other three. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 7, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On July 14, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
August 5, 2009, I was assigned the case. On August 17, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing, which was held on September 23, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 7, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through E, 
which were admitted into evidence. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. On October 1, 2009, additional material was submitted. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted into the 
record as Ex. F through I. On October 1, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the five debts. Applicant’s 
admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of 
the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old military analyst who has worked for a defense 
contractor since July 2007, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance. Applicant 
was in the military 20 years retiring as a Warrant Officer 3. (Tr. 30) 
 
 In July 2007, Applicant was divorced. The divorce decree made him responsible 
for all the marital debt. (Ex. 6, 8) Applicant relinquished none of his military retirement 
income since he had helped his ex-wife obtain her bachelor’s and master’s degree in 
education. In 2008, he became behind on his debts.  
 
 As the divorce proceeded, Applicant sought financial counseling. (Tr. 26) He 
learned about debt, credit, revolving accounts, and secured accounts. In September 
2008, he had 12 past due revolving accounts. (Ex. C) He has now paid four accounts, 
settled one, five others are current, and only two remain past due. (Ex. C) As of 
September 2008, Applicant had seven secured accounts none of which were past due 
and currently none are past due. (Ex. D) His plan is currently to address the small debts 
first, get them paid, and then address the larger debts. (Tr. 28)  
 
 Applicant is current on his mortgage and vehicle loan. (Tr. 28) He owns two real 
estate properties. One he owned before he joined the military, on which there is a 
$50,000 mortgage. His daughter lives in that home. (Tr. 47) The other is his home on 
which there is a $260,000 mortgage. (Tr. 45, 46) He has recently paid off his daughter’s 
vehicle and assists his wife with his daughter’s university expenses. (Tr. 28)  
 
 In January 2009, Applicant was interviewed about his delinquent accounts. At 
that time, Applicant owed a telephone service provider $385 (SOR ¶ 1.a). The creditor 
3 
 
 
offered to settle this debt for $231; however, Applicant did not accept the offer, but 
instead chose to pay the full amount of the debt. (Ex. C, Tr. 38) 
 
Applicant made $150 monthly payments on the $5,822 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 
1.b). The exact number of payments is not part of the record. In April 2009, the creditor 
offered to settle this debt for $2,622, which Applicant accepted and paid. (Ex. 8, F, G) 
He was making $150 monthly payments on the $6,948 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
Between January 2009 and June 2009, Applicant made $990 in payment on this debt. 
(Ex. 7) As of September 2009, the amount owed on the debt was $5,948. (Ex. I)  
Applicant was making monthly payments of $100 to $150 on the $8,597 credit 
card debt (SOR ¶ 1.d). Between June 2008 and June 2009, Applicant paid $2,062 on 
this debt. (Ex. 8) He continues to make $150 monthly payments on this debt. As of 
September 2009, the balance on this debt was $7,461. (Ex. H)  
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife owe approximately $6,666 for past due federal income 
tax (SOR ¶ 1.e) for tax year 2006. In 2006, Applicant and his wife opened IRAs as part 
of their retirement plan. (Tr. 35) The IRA was not properly credited towards their taxes. 
Both Applicant and his ex-wife were to make $125 monthly payments on the debt, which 
he has done. (Ex. 6) He provided proof of making payments in July, August, and 
September 2009. As of August 2009, the balance owed on this account was $5,081. 
(Ex. E) Applicant did not know if his ex-wife was making her payments.  
 
 Applicant’s monthly income is $4,700 and his monthly military retirement is 
$2,500. In June 2009, Applicant provided a personal financial statement (PFS). (Ex. 7) 
His gross monthly income was approximately $6,500, his monthly expenses were 
approximately $2,900, and he was paying $3,400 monthly on his debts. His net monthly 
remainder was $219.  
 
 A summary of Applicant five accounts placed for collection and other past due 
obligations and the current status of those debts follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
a Collection company 
collecting for a telephone bill. 
$385 Paid. The creditor offered to settle this 
matter for $231; however, Applicant 
chose to pay the full amount of the debt. 
(Ex. C, Tr. 38) 
b Credit card account was 
charged off. 
 
$5,822 
 
In April 2009, an offer of settlement 
accepted and $2,622 paid. (Ex. F, G) 
c $630 was past due on credit 
card account. 
 
 
$6,948 Applicant is making monthly payments 
on this debt. As of September 2009, the 
amount owed on the debt was $5,948. 
(Ex. I)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
d Credit card account 
placed for collection. 
 
 
$8,597 Applicant is paying $150 per month on 
this debt. Balance as of September 
2009, was $7,461. (Ex. 8, H) 
e IRS for past due federal 
income tax. 
 
$6,666 Applicant is paying $125 per month on 
this debt. Balance as of August 2009, 
was $5,081. (Ex. E) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $28,418  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
5 
 
 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant had a history of financial 
problems. Following his divorce, Applicant became delinquent on five debts, which 
totaled in excess of $28,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent for they became past due following his 
July 2007 divorce. It is unlikely Applicant will be experiencing another divorce in the 
near future. The obligations occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) has some applicability.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced a divorce, which is a condition beyond 
his control, along with the financial burden associated with it. AG & 20(b) applies. AG ¶ 
20(c) fully applies. Applicant has received financial counseling. Moreover, he 
demonstrated a firm grasp of budgeting, payment plans, and expense reduction. He has 
the self-discipline necessary to reduce and resolve his debts. There are “clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.”  
 
Applicant has also established full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because he 
showed good faith2 in the resolution of her SOR debts. For AG¶ 20 (d) to apply there 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and evidence of a good-
faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling his debts is needed, 
which is present here. 
 
Applicant received a settlement offer on one debt, but chose to pay the full 
amount of the debt. He received a settlement offer on another debt, which he accepted 
and paid. He currently makes $125 monthly payments to the IRS and monthly payments 
on the two remaining credit card accounts.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the type that 
indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Money was not spent frivolously.  
 
Two of the debts have been paid and Applicant is making timely payment on the 
three remaining debts. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid 
or being paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness 
to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) There is nothing in Applicant’s conduct 
or past actions which cause me concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
