 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00301 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns, but he has not mitigated 
Drug Involvement concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 14, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines H and E, Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 26, 2009, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
submitted the government’s written case on January 11, 2010. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 19, 2010. He responded 
on February 1, 2010. The case was assigned to me on February 19, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2008. He is seeking a security clearance for the 
first time. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in May 2008. He is single 
with no children.1  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana on a regular basis while he was in college. From 
September 2003 until he graduated in May 2008, he used marijuana about once or 
twice a week. He used illegal mushrooms on two occasions in about 2004. He injured 
his foot in 2007, and was prescribed Darvocet for the pain. He used the painkiller for 
recreational purposes on about five occasions between January and March 2008. When 
his prescription ran out, a friend provided him with five painkillers. Applicant is unaware 
of what specific drug he received. He took the pills on five occasions in March 2008.2 
 
 Applicant worked for a department store from February 2005 to May 2007. He 
intentionally failed to list his illegal drug use on his employment application, because he 
was concerned that the company would not hire him if it was aware of the extent of his 
drug use. He passed a pre-employment drug test.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
September 24, 2008. Section 24a asked: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?4 
 
Applicant answered “Yes,” and stated that between “09/2003 (Estimated)” and “05/2008 
(Estimated),” he used marijuana an “unknown” number of times. He stated that it was 
“[o]ccasional usage through college.” He did not list his use of mushrooms and 
prescription drugs. Applicant denied intentionally providing false information. He stated 
that he rushed through the application while giving the most accurate answers possible. 
                                                          
1 Item 6. 
 
2 Items 4-6; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
He listed the marijuana use because it was by far his most prevalent use. He stated that 
if he intended to mislead the government he “would have left out everything including 
the marijuana usage.” Applicant also listed adverse criminal information under another 
question.5 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant did not intentionally 
provide incomplete answers to Question 24a. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana after he submitted his SF 86. He moved to the state of 
his current residence in October 2008. He smoked marijuana with his brother the 
weekend before he moved.6  
 
 Applicant revealed his full drug use when he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in November 2008. He told the investigator that he had no plans to quit 
using marijuana unless he had to. He stated that he stopped using painkillers 
recreationally because he ran out of them. He stated that he would use them again in 
the future if he had them. He stated that he would also stop using marijuana if it started 
affecting any other aspect of his life.7  
 
 When Applicant responded to the SOR in October 2009, he stated “I intend to 
quit [marijuana and painkillers] if I have to. I now have to for clearance. I will quit.” 
Applicant clarified his position in his response to the FORM. He stated that the people 
he met when he moved to his current location are not drug users. He stated: 
 
Though during the investigation I did not say that I intended to quit, in the 
year and a half I have been in a professional environment I have been led 
to understand that in order to thrive in a drug-free environment, I must give 
up my “party days” and become a responsible member of the environment 
I have become a part of. Not just for my clearance, but to succeed in an 
atmosphere that is unforgiving of someone under the influence of an 
unclear mind.8   
 
There is no evidence of any illegal drug use after Applicant moved and started his new 
job in October 2008. Applicant’s friends and some of his family members are aware of 
his drug use.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
                                                          
5 Items 4-6; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
6 Items 4, 5; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
9 Item 4; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
4 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
 
5 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;10  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.  
 
 Applicant’s possession and use of marijuana, illegal mushrooms, and 
prescription drugs for recreational purposes are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) 
as disqualifying conditions. He told a background investigator in November 2008 that he 
had no plans to quit using marijuana unless he had to, and that he might use painkillers 
again. Those statements generated security concerns under AG ¶ 25(h).  
 
Two Drug Involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana regularly in college. He also used illegal mushrooms on 
two occasions and prescription drugs for recreational purposes on about ten occasions. 
He continued to periodically use marijuana after college, including on at least one 
occasion after he submitted his SF 86 in September 2008. He moved to another state 
                                                          
10 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction.  
 
6 
 
and started his current job in October 2008. He told the investigator in November 2008 
that he had no plans to quit using marijuana unless he had to, and that he would use 
painkillers recreationally in the future if he had them. When he responded to the SOR in 
October 2009, he stated he intended to quit marijuana and painkillers because he had 
to for his clearance. He further clarified that position when he responded to the FORM. 
The people he knows at his current location do not use drugs, and there is no evidence 
of any illegal drug use after October 2008.  
 
There is no bright-line rule as to whether conduct is recent. However, Applicant’s 
drug use was extensive, occurred over several years, happened on at least one 
occasion after he submitted his SF 86, and he did not commit to being drug free until 
recently, and then because he “had to.” Because Applicant elected not to have a 
hearing, I was unable to ask additional questions or assess his credibility. Based upon 
the limited information in the record, I am unable to find that Applicant’s drug use is 
unlikely to recur. His drug use continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable. Applicant has stated that he does not 
intend to abuse drugs in the future, but he does not receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 
26(b) for the same rationale discussed above. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
 
7 
 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant submitted incomplete information on his SF 86, but as discussed 
above, it was not intentional. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
Applicant provided false information about his drug use on his employment 
application for a department store in 2005. AG ¶¶ 16(b) and 16(e) are applicable as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana after he submitted his SF 86 in September 2008. That 
conduct created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is 
applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant’s falsification of his employment application was five years ago. He has 
not worked for the company for three years. He revealed his drug use during his 
background interview. There is no evidence of any illegal drug use after October 2008. 
 
8 
 
Friends and family members are aware of his drug use. He has taken positive steps to 
reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is 
applicable. Personal Conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 24 years old. He regularly used illegal drugs while in college. He 
continued smoking marijuana after college, including on at least one occasion after he 
submitted his SF 86. He did not commit to being drug free until he saw it as a 
requirement for holding his clearance. Based upon the limited information available in 
the record, concerns remain about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns, but he has not 
mitigated Drug Involvement concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs1.e-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
