                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01939  
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on September 25, 2008, to request a security clearance required as part of 
his employment with a defense contractor (Item 4). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
On September 17, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on September 25, 2009. He signed a notarized 
Answer on October 6, 2009, and requested a decision without a hearing. In his Answer, 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR, except allegation 1.d. and 1.e. He also 
admitted allegation 1.j., with explanation. On November 24, 2009, DOHA Department 
Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM) in support of the government’s 
preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request to be granted a security clearance. The 
FORM contained nine documents, identified as Items 1 through 9. The FORM and 
attached Items were forwarded on November 30, 2009, and received by Applicant on 
December 10, 2009. He was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to 
respond. He did not submit a response. The case was assigned to me on February 4, 
2010, for an administrative decision based on the written record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s 
response to the SOR, I make the following additional factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He has been self-employed since 1985. In 2008, he 
began working on a part-time basis for a federal contractor as a graphic designer. As of 
May 2009, he worked from 20 to 40 hours per week. Since 2004, he has operated a 
drug and alcohol recovery center, which currently  is located in his residence. (Items 4, 
5) 
 
 Applicant married for the first time when he was 19 years old. He divorced his 
first wife approximately three years later. He married again in 1988 and divorced in 
2002. In 2005, Applicant married his third wife. He has three children aged 2, 4, and 22 
years. He and his wife separated in 2008. They share joint custody of the children. 
(Items 4, 5) 
 
 The SOR alleges the following 10 debts, which total $226,000 (Items 7, 8, 9).  
 
Tax Liens:   
 
 State tax lien of $23,062 (allegation 1.a.); 
 
 Federal lien of $100,000 (allegation 1.j.) 
 
Without noting which lien he was referring to, Applicant stated that he filed an 
extension in 2008, but could not afford to continue with the process (Item 6). He 
admits poor money management, resulting in his failure to keep up with his tax 
 
3 
 
 
filings. The theft of $60,000 from his business made it difficult to pay his taxes. 
He made some payments to the IRS, but as of January 2009, he had not made 
any payments within the previous year. He intended at that time to have an 
accountant file federal and state tax returns in July 2009. In his October 2009 
Answer to the SOR, he did not state whether he had filed the tax returns, and 
stated that he is not making payments. (Items 3, 5, 6) 
 
Telecommunications: one debt totaling $69,430 (allegation 1.b. [judgment]) The 
debt is for advertising Applicant's business. As of November 2008, Applicant 
planned to continue making payments until he is able to negotiate a settlement 
amount. However, In October 2009, Applicant stated that the settlement amount 
the creditor demanded was not possible because he does not have the funds. 
(Items 3, 5, 6) 
 
Credit card: $4,205 (allegation 1.c.) Applicant’s original plan was to pay this debt 
with equity from his house when the real estate market improves. The creditor 
has offered settlements in the past, but Applicant did not have the funds to pay 
the amount offered. (Items 5, 6) 
 
Unidentified creditor: $29 (allegation 1.i.) Applicant will pay the debt, and stated 
that he might already have done so. (Item 3)  
 
Utilities: $248 (allegations 1.e.) Applicant does not recognize this debt and 
denies having service from this company. (Item 6) 
 
Vending company: $28,617 (allegation 1.f.) This debt relates to a lease 
Applicant signed while running his business. He negotiated with the creditor, but 
did not have the funds to pay the debt because of the failure of his business. The 
creditor filed suit in April 2009, in an effort to seize various assets. Applicant 
states that the judge did not allow seizure of the assets. As to the debt, he notes 
that “some day I will pay it.” (Items 3, 5, 6) 
 
Medical:  
 
$105 – unknown medical provider (allegation 1.d.) – In his interrogatory 
response, Applicant was unsure of the creditor for this debt. However, in 
his Answer, he denied the debt, because he stated that he “paid it off; I 
have not cleaned it up yet.” He provided no documentation to support this 
claim. (Item 6) 
 
$164 – medical center (allegation 1.g.) - Applicant admits to owing this 
debt and intends to pay it. (Item 3) 
 
$2,417 – unknown medical provider (allegation 1.h. [judgment]) - Applicant 
does not recognize this debt. If it is valid, he intends to pay it. (Item 3) 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 In response to the FORM, Applicant failed to provide documentation to support 
his statement that he paid allegation 1.d., that he has “paid them several times over” as 
to allegation 1.c., or that he “probably” already has paid the $29 debt at allegation 1.i. 
He stated that he would pay the remaining debts when he could.2 
. 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement indicating a net monthly 
income of $1,200, and additional income of $10,000 from the recovery center he 
operates, for a total of $11,200. He listed monthly expenses of $9,900 and debt 
payments of $6,900, for a total monthly outlay of $16,800. These figures result in a 
negative monthly net remainder of $5,600. Applicant did not include payments of SOR 
debts on this expense sheet. (Item 6) 
 
For 25 years, Applicant operated his own business. In about 2003, he hired an 
accountant who stole more than $60,000. In addition, Applicant billed approximately 
$200,000 per year with a large defense contractor. The contractor’s account manager, 
who had referred jobs to Applicant, left that company, and thereafter Applicant no longer 
received assignments from the contractor client. He did not indicate when this event 
occurred. However, these two events severely damaged his business, and he has been 
struggling financially since that time. (Items 3, 5) 
 
In 2006, Applicant adjusted to these changes by moving to an area with a lower 
cost of living. He purchased a foreclosed home, intending to repair it and later use the 
equity to pay debts and improve his credit. The house value has increased from the 
purchase price of $850,000 to an appraised value of $1.25 million in January 2009. He 
also uses his residence as an alcohol and drug addiction recovery center, which 
improved his cash flow. Applicant believes that he is in a solid financial position and 
stated, “My credit is depleted, but the equity I need to pay off my debts is here in my 
home. My plan worked and I will make people whole some day when I can.” He also 
stated, “I will pay my debts and will have a prudent reserve some day as a result of 
investing in my home. The equity is there, stuck for now, but is existent.” (Items 3, 5) 
 
Applicant has also had family difficulties in the past several years. He supported 
his terminally ill sister for the last two years of her life. Her care prevented him from 
maintaining his usual income level from his business. He also spent time and resources 
helping his brother, who died about the same time as his sister. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant did not state whether he has participated in financial counseling. He 
noted in his Answer that he chose not to pursue bankruptcy, which is a legitimate path 
that an applicant can consider to resolve overwhelming debt. Other than his own 
statements, he did not provide character references, performance evaluations, or other 
documents on which to base an assessment of his character. As Applicant chose to 
have his case decided on the basis of the written record, it is difficult to assess his 
credibility. 
 
2 As of May 2009, Applicant also owed approximately $4,000 in loans from three friends. These debts are 
not alleged in the SOR. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).3 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The record evidence shows that Applicant’s unpaid debts of approximately 
$226,000 remain unpaid. In addition, he failed to file state and federal tax returns and 
tax liens have been placed against him. The federal lien alone amounts to $100,000. 
Applicant's history of failing to meet his financial obligations supports application of 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), AG ¶19 
(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) and AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual 
federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same) apply.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating conditions are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 As of the date the SOR was issued, Applicant had more than $200,000 in 
delinquent debt. His financial problems are not in the distant past, because these debts 
remain unpaid. He intends to use his home equity to pay his debts, but has no 
immediate plan to access that equity. Moreover, with his large negative monthly 
remainder, it cannot be predicted when his situation will be resolved, or that new 
delinquencies will not occur in the future. AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is relevant because Applicant’s business suffered two events that 
severely damaged it: the theft of assets by an accountant, and the loss of business from 
Applicant's largest client. These were events that he could not have predicted. However, 
without knowing the dates of these events, it is difficult to determine when they occurred 
in relation to when his debts became delinquent. Applicant earns a limited income from 
part-time employment. It appears from his personal financial statement that he does not 
earn substantial income from the residential center. Applicant's limited income 
contributes to the difficulty in bringing his debts under control. Applicant's relocation, his 
home purchase, and the increase in the house’s value are positive signs. However, his 
long-range plan to use the equity in his home to pay down his debts is a future plan, 
which may or may not be realized. He has taken no other steps toward resolving his 
debt. Only partial mitigation is available under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 It does not appear from the record that Applicant received financial counseling to 
assist him in developing a budget, establishing payment plans, or resolving his debts. 
AG ¶ 20(c) cannot be applied.  
 
 Applicant has provided no documentation supporting his statement that he made 
some payments on the telecommunications debt. He has no payment plans in place. 
There is no evidence indicating that Applicant's debts are in the process of being 
resolved. There is no evidence that he has attempted to tap into his current equity by 
obtaining a home equity loan. The Appeal Board defines “good-faith“ as acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty and adherence to duty or obligation.7 
Promises to act in the future are insufficient to constitute good-faith efforts. Although an 
applicant is not required to have paid every debt, he or she must show a reasonable 
plan for repayment and actions to support the plan. Although Applicant plans to some 
day use his equity to pay his debts, he gives no indication of when that will be, and has 
taken no steps to implement the plan. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Overall, the partial 
mitigation available under AG ¶ 20(b) is insufficient to outweigh the fact that Applicant 
carries a very large debt load and has taken no steps to resolve it. I find against the 
Applicant on Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
7 ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004). 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. His income decreased when his business suffered 
substantial losses from theft by an employee and the departure of his major client. 
These factors, as well as his admitted mismanagement of his finances, contributed to 
the significant debt load of more than $200,000 that he accrued over the past several 
years. Although he states that he will some day pay his creditors with the equity in his 
home, there is no evidence of a concrete plan to do so, nor any steps taken in that 
direction. Applicant's failure to file tax returns and pay his legitimate tax obligations also 
raises concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability. 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts raised by his substantial indebtedness. 
Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national interest. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.j.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
