1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04230
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Edward P. Epstein, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s history of drug involvement generates a security concern. Applicant’s
drug use occurred during his college years. He has not used any illegal drugs for a year.
Since graduating, he has obtained a job with a defense contractor, where he has
excelled, and he no longer associates with his friends who use illegal drugs. Applicant
has mitigated the drug involvement security concern. Clearance is granted.
On August 31, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 29, 2009, admitting all of the
allegations except SOR subparagraph 1.a, and requesting a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on November 3, 2009. On November 20, 2009, a notice of hearing was
2
issued, scheduling the case for December 15, 2009. The hearing was held as
scheduled. At the hearing, I received three government exhibits, twelve Applicant
exhibits, and Applicant’s testimony. The transcript was received on December 22, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 22-year-old single man. He graduated from college in May 2009,
earning a 3.8 grade point average with a major in logistics, transportation, and supply
chain management, and a second major in marketing (Tr. 16). While in college, he was
president of the university’s Marketing and Logistics Society (AE J). The university
where Applicant graduated has one of the top supply chain management programs in
the country (AE D, Reference Letter of Program Coordinator). Applicant was one of the
program’s top students (Id.).
Since graduating from college, Applicant has worked for a defense contractor as
a supply chain program manager (AE B). He was recruited through the company’s
professional development program (Id.). He manages an 18 million dollar research and
development program (Tr. 18). His company assigns mentors to new employees “to
help familiarize [them] with the corporate culture” (AE F). According to Applicant’s
mentor, he is an industrious, conscientious worker who is eager to learn (Id.). The
senior level department manager characterizes Applicant as one of the best young
employees with whom she has ever worked in her five years at the company (AE A). 
Applicant used illegal drugs while in college, including marijuana, cocaine,
ecstasy, and hallucinogenic mushrooms (Tr. 25-26). Also, while in college, he misused
Aderal, a drug typically prescribed to children with attention-deficit disorder to increase
focus (Tr. 33). (Tr. 33). Applicant used the cocaine and ecstasy on three occasions,
respectively, and the hallucinogenic mushrooms twice. Applicant abused Aderal during
final exam periods to help him study for long periods of time (Tr. 33).
Applicant used marijuana four times per week at social gatherings (GE 2 at 3).
He stopped using it in February 2009, shortly before completing his security clearance
application; and he has not used it, nor any other illegal drug since then (Tr. 18). He
disclosed his college drug use and discussed it in detail on his security application, as
required (GE 1).
Applicant no longer associates with the friends with whom he used illegal drugs.
He has no intention of ever using illegal drugs again, and supported this statement of
intent with an affidavit executed the day of the hearing (AE L).
Applicant volunteers in his community by mentoring children in a local public
school system approximately once every other week (Tr. 21). Typically, he eats lunch
with them or accompanies them to recess (Tr. 29). 
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant’s history of illegal drug
use triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and 25(c), “illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”
One year of abstinence from illegal drugs is not a long time given the amount of
marijuana Applicant smoked and the length of time he used it. Conversely, he has
graduated from college and disassociated himself from his drug-using friends.
Moreover, Applicant no longer lives on campus, the environment where his classmates
used illegal drugs.
4
Most importantly, Applicant has matured into a responsible adult who performs
exceptionally well on the job, and spends his spare time mentoring youth.
Consequently, under these circumstances, the time that has elapsed since Applicant
last used illegal drugs constitutes an appropriate period of abstinence, and his stated
intention, as set forth in the affidavit he submitted, not to use illegal drugs in the future is
credible. The following mitigating conditions are applicable:
AG ¶ 26(a) - the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.”
AG ¶ 26(b) - a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s immaturity was a major contributing factor for his past drug
involvement. Given the maturity he has demonstrated since graduating from college
(disassociating from his drug-using friends, excelling on the job, volunteering in the
community), I conclude that his college drug use is not predictive of future behavior.
Upon evaluating this case in the context of the whole person concept, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement security concern.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
