                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03765 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant lacks a track record of financial responsibility. He failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2009, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
June 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, denied, or revoked. 
 
On July 31, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
28, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 29, 2009. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on October 21, 2009. The government offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1, which was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 29, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, except SOR ¶ 1.d, which he denied. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of 
the evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old internet security engineer and communications 
technician employed by a defense contractor. He graduated from high school in 1993. 
He married his wife in May 1998. They have four children, ages 13, 12, 3, and 2. His 
wife works as an administrative assistant. She contributes financially to the household.  
 
Applicant has been consistently employed since January 1994. However, he did 
not hold a full-time job through all this period. He explained that, during most of his 
working life, he has held both a full-time job and a part-time job. Applicant has worked 
for his part-time employer, a government contractor, from January 2002 to present. His 
part-time employer is sponsoring his security clearance.  
 
In late 2006, Applicant resigned from his then full-time job. He was involved in 
numerous traffic violations and lost too many points off his driver’s license.1 His 
employer demoted him because he was not allowed to drive a company vehicle with so 
many traffic violations. He resigned to look for a better-paying job. He has worked for 
his current full-time employer since October 2008. He believes his full-time employer will 
also assign him to a position that requires a security clearance sometime in the near 
future. 
 
 
1  Between 2001 and 2007, Applicant committed four speeding violations, and in 2005 he drove 
with a suspended or revoked license. In 2009, he also was cited for Improper/Registration/Unauthorized 
Transfer and Noise Violation. 
 
3 
 
 
In Applicant’s February 2009 security clearance application, he indicated that he 
had debts that were over 180 days delinquent within the last seven years and that he 
had no debts 90 days delinquent at the time he completed his application. He also 
indicated that in the last seven years he had property repossessed, wages garnished, 
and unpaid judgments. His background investigation addressed his financial status and 
included the review of February and June 2009 credit bureau reports (CBRs) and his 
security clearance application.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s debts were discharged after filing for 
bankruptcy protection in 1998. It also alleges 11 delinquent or charged off accounts, 
totaling approximately $52,044, most of which have been delinquent for a number of 
years. Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, except SOR ¶ 1.d. The debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d ($468) concerns an unidentified medical creditor. The record evidence 
does not allow for the identification of the unlisted medical creditor. I find this allegation 
for Applicant. 
 
Concerning his 1998 bankruptcy filing, Applicant explained that he filed for 
bankruptcy because of his financial inexperience and immaturity. At age 24, he 
purchased a car, acquired a large credit card debt, and lent $8,000 to a friend. He was 
overextended financially and sought bankruptcy protection as a quick way to get rid of 
his debt (Tr. 40).  
 
Applicant testified he had no financial problems from 1998 until sometime in 
2006, when he and his wife made a number of financial mistakes. He attributed his 
current financial problems to the following factors. In June 2006, he and his wife bought 
a $475,472 home, took a $17,000 loan to purchase things for the home (SOR ¶ 1.g, 
$17,357), and purchased a Ford Explorer for his wife (SOR ¶ 1.k, $9,465). Applicant 
had purchased a Buick in 2003. In June-August 2006, the Buick engine died and he 
returned the car to the dealership. In August 2006, Applicant bought a $30,000 Lincoln 
Navigator for himself to replace the Buick he returned to the dealership (SOR ¶ 1.i, 
$13,510). Applicant failed to continue making payments on the Buick note (SOR ¶ 1.h, 
$8,977) because he did not have sufficient income to pay for all of his debts. 
 
Around August 2006, Applicant’s wife lost her job while she was pregnant with 
their third child. She was not able to find full-time employment for the next two years 
until after the birth of their fourth child. Applicant and his wife currently make a total of 
approximately $7,600. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s and his wife’s earnings are not 
sufficient to pay for his day-to-day living expenses and his current debts, even without 
considering their delinquent debts (Tr. 63-67). Additionally, Applicant owes 
approximately $9,500 to family members from whom he borrowed money to purchase 
his current vehicle, a used Chevy Uplander van. 
 
In his answer to the SOR and at his hearing, Applicant stated he has attended 
several financial management seminars, that he and his wife follow a budget, and that 
they enrolled in a consumer credit consolidation program. He presented no 
documentary evidence to support any of these claims. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant considers himself to be honest and forthcoming about his past and 
present financial situation. He highlighted that he has performed well for government 
contractors and is a valued employee. There is no evidence that Applicant has 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems and averred he has 
always intended to pay for his delinquent debts. He claims he understands the 
importance of having and maintaining financial responsibility. He promised to make 
satisfactory payment arrangements with all his creditors sometime in the future. 
However, at the present time, he does not have the financial means to pay for his day-
to-day living expenses, his current debts, and his delinquent debts. He does not have 
the financial means to pay for even the smallest of his delinquent debts. 
 
Since 2006, Applicant has made no effort to contact any of his creditors or to 
resolve any of the alleged delinquent debts, because he did not have the financial 
means to do so. Based on Applicant’s credit reports, his testimony, and his statements, 
I find that Applicant is responsible for all the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
except SOR ¶ 1.d. These 10 debts total approximately $51,576, and they are not 
resolved. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”2 Once the 
government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 11 delinquent debts, many of which have been delinquent for a 
number of years. Applicant and his spouse are responsible for all their delinquent debs, 
except for SOR ¶ 1.d. These 10 debts total approximately $51,576, and they are not 
resolved.  
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show that he has paid, settled, 
or attempted to resolve any of the alleged debts since 2006. Based on his testimony, he 
 
2  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
 
 
does not have the financial means to pay his legal obligations, delinquent debts, and his 
day-to-day living expenses. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, apply. His failure to pay even 
the smallest debt shows he is financially overextended. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant established some circumstances beyond his control, which contributed 
to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his and his wife’s periods of unemployment. I find 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial concerns. 
Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. The evidence clearly shows Applicant and his wife were living beyond 
their financial means when they purchased a $475,472 home, obtained a $17,000 loan, 
and purchased two vehicles for approximately $45,000. He presented no evidence of 
debt payments, contacts with creditors, or negotiations to resolve his SOR debts. 
Because of his failure to address even the small SOR debts, I also find he is not 
financially responsible. Considering the evidence as a whole, his financial problems are 
not under control. Applicant does not seem to have a viable financial plan to resolve his 
financial predicament or to avoid similar financial problems in the future. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), and (e) do not apply because Applicant’s financial problems 
are not yet under control, and it is questionable whether he has participated in financial 
 
7 
 
 
counseling. He also failed to show he made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. His 
actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 20(f) 
does not apply.  
 
 Despite partial applicability of AG ¶ 20(b), financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Applicant has not demonstrated his financial responsibility by taking 
sufficient action to resolve his debts.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  
  
  Between 2001 and 2007, Applicant committed four speeding violations, and in 
2005 he drove with a suspended or revoked license. In 2009, he also was cited for 
Improper/Registration/Unauthorized Transfer and Noise Violation. His behavior triggers 
the applicability of disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(d):  
 
Credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists three conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
After considering the totality of the circumstances, I find that AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 
and 17(e) apply. Applicant has not been cited for speeding since 2007. He expressed 
sincere remorse for his numerous traffic violations and promised to abstain from similar 
 
8 
 
 
behavior in the future. He seems to have learned from his mistakes and behaves now 
as a mature adult. Applicant’s numerous traffic violations constituted civil infractions and 
could be considered minor violations. Notwithstanding, his civil violations do show an 
inability or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. On balance, I find his 
questionable behavior to be somewhat remote and unlikely to recur. I find this guideline 
for Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man and a 
good worker. There is no evidence he has ever compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. These factors show some responsibility, good 
judgment, and mitigation. Applicant also established some circumstances beyond his 
control, which contributed to his inability to pay his debts.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. His financial problems are due primarily to his 
living beyond his financial means. He presented little documentary evidence of debt 
payments, contacts with creditors, or negotiations of debts. His favorable information 
fails to show financial responsibility and good judgment. He has made no effort to 
resolve his financial obligations. His financial problems are not under control. He does 
not have a viable plan to avoid similar financial problems in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
9 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c, and    Against Applicant 
    1.e - 1.l: 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
