 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02069 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 2, 2009, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on August 
 
2 
 
14, 2009, and reassigned to me on September 18, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on September 30, 2009, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
November 3, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
(AE) A through C, which were received without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted two documents, which 
were marked AE D and E, and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on November 12, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He has a bachelor’s degree. He has never been 
married and has no children.1  
 
 Applicant’s finances were in order prior to a period of unemployment and a 
business arrangement that went bad. Applicant lost his job in December 2005, and was 
unemployed until June 2006. He was in a partnership which held real estate. The 
partner was living in one of their properties and refused to pay his share of the 
partnership’s business expenses. The partner did not pay the mortgage, utilities, taxes, 
or any of the other costs of living in the house for two years. He also took money out of 
Applicant’s accounts without authorization. Applicant filed a lawsuit against the partner 
in about January 2006. Among other remedies, he sought to evict the partner so the 
house could be sold. The partner passed away in October 2007, before the legal case 
had concluded. Applicant and his partner owned their properties as joint tenants, so the 
properties automatically passed to Applicant.2 The partner’s heirs contested the joint 
tenancy and the right of survivorship. The case was ultimately resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. Applicant spent almost $40,000 in legal fees protecting his property interests in 
the two legal actions. He was unable to fight the legal battles and pay his mortgages 
and his unsecured debts. He chose to pay his mortgages so he would not lose the 
properties, and resolve the unsecured debts after the situation stabilized.3  
 
Applicant began to address his financial issues after his legal problems ended. 
He contracted with a debt resolution company in March 2009, to assist him in 
addressing his problem and establishing payment plans. Applicant enrolled in their debt 
settlement program (DSP). Applicant agreed to pay $725 per month into the DSP by 
automatic debit from his bank account. The company would hold the funds until they 
negotiated a settlement with a creditor, and would then disburse funds to the creditors. 
The DSP includes the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b. and 1.c. The total balance of 
those three accounts is listed on the DSP worksheet as $30,880.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 35, 49; GE 1. 
 
2 “The primary incident of joint tenancy is survivorship, by which the entire tenancy on the 
decease of any joint tenant remains to the survivor.” Black’s Law Dictionary. 
 
3 Tr. at 28-36; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 36-41, 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5. 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts, with balances totaling $47,122. Applicant 
admitted owing all the debts alleged in the SOR, with explanations. Individual debts are 
addressed below. 
  
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($12,407) and 1.b ($10,728) are included in 
Applicant’s DSP. They are the next debts to be addressed by the debt resolution 
company.5  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the credit union alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for a delinquent 
credit card account, but he disputed owing the $12,000 alleged in the SOR. The credit 
union filed a lawsuit against the Applicant in 2008. Applicant retained an attorney to 
defend him in the action. There were several settlement offers but they were rejected. 
The lawsuit was dismissed without a settlement in August 2009. Applicant and his 
attorney plan on renewing discussion with the credit union’s attorney to pay a fair 
settlement of the debt. Applicant recently paid $3,000 to settle a disputed debt to the 
same credit union over a separate checking account. That debt was not alleged in the 
SOR.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a delinquent debt of $4,426 to a credit card company. 
Applicant entered into a payment agreement with the company in April 2009. He paid 
$150 in April, May, and June, 2009, and then paid the remainder in July 2009.7 
 
 Applicant’s debt resolution company settled the $7,561 delinquent debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e for $2,100. The company paid the creditor $700 in August, September, and 
October 2009.8 
 
 Applicant had other delinquent debts that were paid before the SOR was issued. 
He paid a delinquent cellular telephone services debt of $992 in April 2009.9 Applicant 
has not received formal financial counseling. He earns a substantial salary, and he 
receives rent from his property. He plans to continue with his debt resolution company’s 
DSP until his remaining delinquent debts are paid. He borrowed against his 401(k) 
when he was struggling. He has been repaying the 401(k) loan with $600 monthly 
payments. The loan will be paid within the next few months. Once that loan is paid, he 
plans on obtaining another loan from the 401(k) and placing a large lump-sum into the 
DSP to resolve his debts. Until then, he has the resources to maintain his DSP 
payments.10  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
5 Tr. at 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE B. 
 
7 Tr. at 39-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5; AE . 
 
8 Tr. at 36-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE C. 
 
9 Tr. at 36-39, 50; GE 2; AE A. 
 
10 Tr. at 47-54; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his character. He is described as 
a “very hard worker,” a “model citizen,” and a man whose “word is his bond and he will 
always follow through on commitments.” A retired Army colonel stated that of all the 
industry professionals he has known over the last seven years, he rated Applicant in the 
top three “for character values and integrity.” The character references recommend him 
for a security clearance.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
                                                          
11 AE D, E. 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant still has several debts to resolve. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s finances were in good shape before several events. He lost his job in 
December 2005, and was unemployed until June 2006. His business partner stopped 
contributing to their business expenses. The partner lived in one of their properties, did 
not pay his share of the mortgage, utilities, and taxes, and refused to vacate. Applicant 
was forced to sue him. The partner died before the trial. Applicant and the partner 
owned their properties as joint tenants, with the right of survivorship. The deceased 
partner’s heirs contested the joint tenancy. Applicant ultimately was declared the legal 
owner of the properties, but he spent almost $40,000 in legal fees for the two actions. 
These all qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 
20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. After the 
legal proceedings were over, Applicant went about addressing his finances. He paid 
several debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He contracted with a debt resolution 
company in March 2009, and began paying $725 per month to their debt settlement 
program. The SOR alleges five delinquent debts. Applicant settled a debt without using 
the DSP. One debt was settled through the DSP. He has hired an attorney and was 
disputing in court the amount owed on another debt. The creditor dismissed the lawsuit. 
Applicant plans on having his attorney negotiate a fair settlement for that debt, and then 
pay it. The remaining two debts are the next to be addressed by the DSP. Applicant 
credibly testified that he plans on placing a lump-sum in the DSP to resolve those debts. 
In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the Appeal Board 
discussed an applicant’s burden of proof under these mitigating factors: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can 
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. 
 
7 
 
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually 
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the 
SOR. 
 
I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances; there are clear 
indications his financial problems are being resolved and are under control; and he has 
made a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s favorable character evidence. I also considered the circumstances that led 
to his financial problems and the steps he has taken to address his issues. As indicated 
above, an applicant is not required to establish that he has paid every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has established a plan 
to resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. I 
find that Applicant has established a plan to resolve his financial problems and has 
taken significant action to implement that plan. His finances do not constitute a security 
concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
