                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03478 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On October 14, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 9, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 7, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on January 26, 2010. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through H, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on February 3, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.k and 1.r. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old and works as an administrative assistant for a federal 
contractor. She has been employed with the same contractor since 2002. From 2000 to 
2002, she worked in the office of her church. Applicant has been married three times. 
Her first two marriages ended in divorce. She was married to her third husband from 
1990 to January 2002, when he passed away from cancer. She has two grown children, 
ages 38 and 24.1  
 
 In February 2006, Applicant became aware that something was wrong with her 
mother. In approximately June 2006, Applicant’s mother was diagnosed with 
Alzheimer’s disease. Her disease progressed until she passed away in December 2009. 
Her father also had severe medical problems. Their only income was Social Security 
benefits. Applicant felt an obligation to take care of her parents during their time of 
need. She moved into their home to care for them. Her mother’s disease progressed 
and her father had difficulty handling the issues associated with the disease. Her 
mother’s doctor recommended her mother be placed in adult day care. Applicant paid 
approximately $550 a month to pay for the day care, and additional medical and other 
expenses associated with her mother’s needs. Her mother’s Social Security benefit was 
$400. She was not approved for Medicaid until shortly before she passed away.2  
 
Applicant admitted that while she was caring for her parents, she did not focus on 
her financial issues. She was focused on caring for her parents. At one point, the day 
care center could no longer provide care for her mother, and Applicant became 
responsible for the full-time care of her mother, including feeding, dressing, and bathing 
her.  
 
 In March 2006, Applicant fell in the parking lot at work. She tore her rotator cuff 
and needed surgery. She was denied worker’s compensation. She worked only part-
time from March through May 2006. After her surgery on May 22, 2006, she did not 
work until July 7, 2006. She did not receive any income during this period. She had to 
take additional time off work for physical therapy, so was not working full-time. During 
this period, Applicant fell behind in paying her bills.3  
1 Tr. 43-46. 
 
2 Tr. 24-30; AE C, D, E. 
 
3 Tr. 30-32; AE F. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 The debt in SOR 1.a is a judgment for a credit card debt ($3,188). Applicant 
began making payments on the judgment in 2008. She has satisfied all but the 
remaining balance of $216, which she intends to pay.4 
 
 The debt in SOR 1.b is a judgment for a credit card debt ($2,363). Applicant has 
been making payments to resolve the debt and the current balance owed is $1,352.5 
 
 Applicant admits she owes the remaining debts on the SOR to include 1.c, a 
credit card judgment ($3,422), 1.d, a credit card debt ($694), 1.e, a medical bill ($320), 
1.f, an unknown medical account ($97) that Applicant believes is a duplicate of 1.h 
($97), 1.g, a medical bill ($268), 1.i, a credit card debt ($3,176), 1.j, a credit card debt to 
a clothing store ($765), 1.l, a credit card debt ($7,705), 1.m, a credit card debt ($732), 
1.n, is for a debt to an eyeglass store ($690), 1.o, is a debt to a clothing store ($777), 
1.p, is a credit card debt ($1,968), 1.q, is a debt for a gasoline credit card ($563), 1.r, is 
a debt for telephone services ($119), 1.s is a debt for telephones services ($83), 1.t is a 
debt for telephone services ($320), 1.u, is an unknown debt ($1,279), 1.v, is a debt for 
mail-order vitamins, 1.w, is an unknown account ($367), and I.x, is for medical services 
($341). Applicant has not made any payments on these debts and has not contacted 
the creditors to resolve the debts. She did not have the money to make settlement 
offers or payment arrangements, and did not want to agree to pay an amount she knew 
she would not be able to meet.6  
 
 The debt in SOR 1.k is a credit card that is in Applicant’s father’s name and she 
is a card holder. Applicant stated that her father has held this card since the 1960s and 
she was a card holder. She made purchases using the card over the years and stated 
she paid her portion of the bill when she made the purchases. She stated that she has 
made payments on behalf of her father to help satisfy the bill. The creditor will not 
discuss the bill with her because she is not listed as the primary holder of the account.7  
 
 Applicant does not have a budget, but she did provide a written plan of how she 
intends to pay her delinquent debts. Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately 
$3,000 and her monthly expenses are approximately $1,852, and her remaining income 
is $1,148. The plan she provided calls for making $1,850 payments towards her 
delinquent debts, which is more than she has remaining. She has approximately $800 in 
savings. Applicant intends on starting the plan this month.8  
   
 
 
 
4 Tr. 32-34, 47; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 34-36, 47, AE G. 
 
6 Tr. 36-43, 47-63. 
 
7 Tr. 20-24, 55-56; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 63-81; AE H. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has a significant history of being unwilling or unable to meet her 
financial obligations. She has many debts that remain unpaid and delinquent. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because her delinquent debts remain unpaid. She 
has not taken action to resolve most of her debts. She has a budget and hopes to start 
paying her debts, but she has not started to implement it. At this point, it is too early to 
conclude that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition (a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has been assisting her parents financially and caring for them. She 
also had an injury that kept her from working. These were conditions that were beyond 
her control and raise the application of mitigating condition (b). In order for that 
mitigating condition to be fully applicable, Applicant must have acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. In this case, Applicant has made some effort to make payments on 
two judgments, and resolve a debt that was attributed to her, but belonged to her father. 
However, she admitted she did not focus on her bills while she was caring for her 
parents. I find mitigating condition (b) only partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, although she 
has put together a budget. She is paying two judgments and it appears another debt 
belongs to her father. Applicant has not taken any other action to resolve her delinquent 
debts Applicant does not have any payment plans in place and has not contacted 
creditors. At this juncture, until Applicant makes further progress towards reducing her 
financial delinquencies, it is too early to conclude that the problem is resolved or under 
control. She has not made good-faith payments to most of her creditors. I find mitigating 
conditions (c) and (d) do not apply. Applicant disputed the debt owed by her father. I 
find mitigating condition (e) applies to this debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant took on the responsibility 
for caring for her parents when they became sick. She moved in with them and helped 
them out financially. She admitted she did not stay focused on her finances during this 
time and accumulated delinquent debts. She was injured and was out of work, which 
exacerbated her financial problems. Applicant has a budget that includes repaying her 
delinquent debts, but she needs time to implement it and establish a record of being 
fiscally responsible. Once she does this, she is likely to be a viable candidate for a 
security clearance. However, at this time, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.j   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.k:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.x:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
