 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00206 
                                                            )                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on July 31, 2008. On September 18, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
 
2 
 
 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 30, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 
1, 2009. On December 17, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling 
Applicant’s hearing for January 13, 2010. On that date, I convened a hearing to 
consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced 11 exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 11 and admitted to the record without objection. The Government 
also offered a one-page chart summarizing the status of the six debts alleged on the 
SOR and indicating where information on those debts could be found in the 
Government’s exhibits. I marked the chart as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, and it was 
admitted to the record without objection. 
 
 Applicant testified on her own behalf and called four witnesses. She introduced 
38 exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A through Ex. Z and Ex. A-2 through Ex. L-2. 
Applicant’s exhibits were admitted to the record without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing on January 22, 2010. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.) In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the allegations at ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c. She denied the allegations at ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., and 
1.f.  The Government stipulated that the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f. had been 
settled and the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. had been otherwise resolved. Applicant’s 
admissions are included herein as findings of fact. (Ex. L; Ex. M; Ex. N; Ex. O; Tr. 39-
40.) 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, married, and the mother of two small children. In 1998, 
she earned a Bachelor of Science degree in marketing. She has attended law school for 
one year.  (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Ex. F-2; Tr.122-124.) 
 
 Applicant was commissioned as an officer and served on active military duty from 
May 1998 through June 2003. She was an inactive reservist from July 2003 until May 
2005. She resigned her commission and received an honorable discharge from military 
service on May 15, 2006. (Ex. 1; Ex. W; Tr. 123.) 
 
 Between 2003 and 2005, Applicant worked as a settlement agent and processor 
for two real estate title companies. In March 2005, Applicant and her mother established 
a business which conducted real estate closings for purchase and refinance 
transactions. In addition to being a co-owner, Applicant served as the operations 
manager for the business. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 1; Tr. 112-115, 167-169.) 
 
3 
 
 
 In the latter part of 2007, the decline in the real estate market began to affect 
Applicant’s business. In March 2008, Applicant and her mother agreed to close the 
business. In June 2008, the business closed. Applicant was without an income from 
March 2008 until she began her present employment in July 2008. She is employed as 
a program control and operations analyst by a government contractor. She seeks a 
security clearance. (Ex. 1; Ex. Y; Tr. 129, 170-172.) 
 
 Applicant is responsible for three delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$70,000. Applicant’s credit bureau reports show that she owes a judgment creditor 
approximately $25,872 on a personal loan that she took out in July 2007. The last 
payment on the loan was made in December 2007. In June 2009, the creditor obtained 
a judgment against Applicant in order to satisfy the debt. This debt was alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.a. (Ex. 5; Ex. 6; Ex. 8; Ex. 11; Tr. 101-102.) 
 
 Applicant admitted the debt. She advised that in October 2008 she entered an 
agreement with a debt repayment firm and began to make a monthly payment of $554 
to reduce this and other delinquencies. In September 2009, she removed the debt from 
the debt repayment program and entered into a repayment agreement with the creditor. 
In October 2009, she made a payment of $1,500 to the creditor. She also made 
payments of $300 in October, November, and December 2009. (Ex. Z; Ex. A-2; Tr. 63, 
97-101.)    
 
 Applicant owes a second judgment creditor approximately $9,969 on a credit 
card debt that became delinquent in December 2007. This debt, which was alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.b., was also included in Applicant’s debt repayment plan. Applicant hoped to 
settle the debt, but the debt repayment firm did not negotiate a settlement. Applicant 
requested that the firm return her money. In December 2009, Applicant made one 
payment of $250 to the judgment creditor. In January 2010, Applicant received a refund 
of approximately $7,348 from the debt repayment firm. Applicant spoke with the creditor 
and discussed the possibility of settling the debt by using some of the refund she 
received from the debt repayment firm. (Ex. Z; Ex. B-2; Tr. 105-107.) 
 
 Applicant’s third debt arose as a consequence of her failure to pay the mortgage 
on a townhouse she purchased in 2004. In 2005, she refinanced the mortgage on the 
townhouse and purchased a second property as a residence, retaining the townhouse 
as an investment property. The first mortgage on the refinanced townhouse was for 
$332,000. The second mortgage on the refinanced townhouse was for $41,500. (Ex. C-
2.) 
 
 Applicant listed the townhouse for sale in August 2005. When the property did 
not sell by December 2005, she withdrew it from the market. In March 2007, Applicant 
again listed the townhouse for sale. When the townhouse did not sell by the end of 
September 2007, she again withdrew it from the market. Applicant and a tenant signed 
a one-year lease in October 2007. In August 2008, the tenant stopped paying rent.  
Applicant has pursued payment by suing the tenant in small claims court. Applicant let 
the property to a second tenant in October 2008. The second tenant stopped paying 
 
4 
 
 
rent in July 2009. The tenant made a partial payment of back rent in October 2009 and 
has declared bankruptcy. Applicant’s husband has retained the monthly rent payments 
made by the tenants in his savings account to be used in the event that the lender 
approves a loan modification for the property. Applicant estimated that the rental 
payments saved by her husband in his account total approximately $16,000. (Ex. C-2; 
Tr. 110, 118-120.) 
 
 Applicant has not made payments on the town house mortgage since April 2008, 
and the delinquent debt of $34,000 is still outstanding. Applicant’s credit bureau report 
of January 2010 shows the delinquency has increased to $42,435. The delinquent 
mortgage debt is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. In September 2008, the lender filed a notice of 
intent to foreclose. The lender has advised Applicant that it will accept nothing less than 
the full amount of the delinquency, plus attorneys’ fees. Foreclosure has not yet 
occurred. (Ex. 10; Ex. 11; Tr. 83, 107-111, 118, 191.)  
 
 Applicant provided information on her past and current expenditures and financial 
status. She reported an annual income of $91,520. Her husband is employed as an 
engineering services support manager. His annual salary is $98,820. Additionally, he 
has a second job which pays approximately $13,000 a year.  (Ex. Y; Tr. 181.) 
 
 In December 2005, Applicant purchased a used 2004 Porsche SUV. Her monthly 
payments on the vehicle were $1,009. Applicant made the monthly payments until 
November 2009, when she traded the car for 2006 Jeep SUV. Her monthly payments 
on the Jeep are $375. (Tr. 112-114.) 
 
 Applicant settled the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. for less than the amount owed. 
In a letter to Applicant, dated October 30, 2009, confirming the settlement, the creditor 
gave notice that it was required to file a Form 1099C with the Internal Revenue Service 
for forgiveness of a debt of $600 or more. Applicant stated that she had not received a 
Form 1099C or a notice of imputed income as the result of settling the debt for less than 
the amount owed. (Ex. N; Tr. 121-122.)  
 
 Together, Applicant and her husband owe $72,000 in student loans. Applicant 
was responsible for a monthly scheduled payment of $543 to repay her student loans of 
approximately $45,000. In August 2009, Applicant received notice that she was four 
months past due on her student loan debt and owed a delinquency of $2,172, including 
fees and late charges. Applicant paid the student loan creditor approximately $2,302 in 
December 2009 to satisfy the delinquency.  (Ex. L-2; Tr. 211-212.) 
 
 Applicant and her husband received a refund of $18,000 on their 2008 federal 
income tax filing. They also received a refund on their 2007 federal income tax filing. 
The refunds were used to pay off debts from Applicant’s business, which was closed in 
June 2008.  (Tr. 203-205.)   
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant provided a household budget that showed the following: net monthly 
household income: $15,1031; monthly debt, including household expenses: $13,789; 
monthly net remainder: $1,314. Applicant uses the net monthly remainder to satisfy 
debts not listed on the SOR. (Ex. D-2; Tr. 116-118.) 
 
 Applicant has several hundred dollars in a savings account. She does not 
contribute to a retirement account. Her employer has contributed approximately $900 on 
her behalf to a 401k account. (Tr. 115-116.) 
 
 Applicant provided 15 letters of character reference from friends, co-workers, and 
managers with whom she has worked. The letters praised Applicant’s professionalism, 
technical skills, and work ethic. A senior officer in the company where Applicant now 
works stated that he was “very impressed by her high degree of integrity, responsibility, 
and customer support.” (Ex. U.)   
 
                                                        Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
1 This figure included $2,000 in rent from the townhouse. Applicant’s Ex. C-2 established that the tenant 
occupying the town house had not paid rent since July 2009 and had declared bankruptcy. When the 
townhouse rent is subtracted from Applicant’s monthly household income, she appears to have a monthly 
deficit of over $600. (Ex. C-2; Ex. D-2.) 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
 
7 
 
 
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.   
 
Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt. Despite a substantial income, 
she was unable to pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. If the 
financially delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might 
apply. If “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply. If “the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply. If “the individual 
initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” then 
AG ¶ 20(d) might apply. Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
The record shows that Applicant’s financial delinquencies began before she 
experienced financial hardship when her business closed, and they continue to this day. 
Applicant’s current financial delinquencies involve substantial sums of money, occurred 
under circumstances that are likely to recur, and cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
The record does not include facts that suggest protracted conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control that would explain her failure over a period of years to meet her 
financial obligations. While she experienced unemployment for several months in 2008, 
she has been steadily employed at a high salary with her current employer since July 
2008. To her credit, Applicant sought to consolidate her debts, and, as of December 
2009, she is current in paying her student loan obligations. She has settled or otherwise 
paid three of the debts alleged on the SOR. However, three other debts, totaling over 
$70,000 and alleged on the SOR, remain unresolved. She and her husband have a 
combined annual gross income of over $200,000, but it is not clear that she has a plan 
in place for avoid financial overextension in the future. According to her budget, she 
spends more than she earns each month. While Applicant’s intention to satisfy her 
creditors is laudable, she has failed to demonstrate a track record of financial 
responsibility. She has not yet demonstrated priorities that emphasize paying her 
existing debts and avoiding additional financial delinquencies in the future. While I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply in part to the facts of Applicant’s case, I also 
 
8 
 
 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(e) is not raised by the facts 
of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s friends, co-
workers, and managers respect and appreciate her professionalism. She works hard 
and is a reliable employee. She has been steadily employed with her current employer 
for about one and one-half years. She earns a high salary.  
 
Applicant has addressed her student loan delinquencies only recently, and it is 
not clear from the information she provided why she did not allocate some of her federal 
income tax refunds to satisfy her existing debts. Applicant’s financial problems began 
when she was a mature adult. She is responsible for approximately $70,000 in 
delinquent debt. While she recently established payment plans to satisfy two judgments, 
she has failed to demonstrate that she has developed a long-term plan to satisfy her 
creditors and understands how to avoid excessive debt in the future. She appears to 
have a monthly deficit of over $600, putting in doubt her ability to make consistent 
payments to reduce her debt in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I 
conclude, after a careful review of the facts of her case, the Financial Considerations 
adjudicative guideline, and the whole person concept, that Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from her financial delinquencies. If she wishes, and if her 
employer supports reapplication, Applicant can reapply for a security clearance one 
 
9 
 
 
year after the date that this decision becomes final. At that time, she can produce new 
evidence that addresses the Government’s current security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
            Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d. through 1.f.:  For Applicant 
 
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
