                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01194 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 18, 2007, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On July 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 27, 2009. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
On September 22, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s 
written case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
the Applicant on the same date. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
October 12, 2009. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on November 11, 2009. I received the case 
assignment on January 8, 2010. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
      Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (PRC). (FORM at Page 1) The 
request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included 
in the record as Administrative Notice Documents I through XV. Applicant had no 
objection to these documents. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s Answer admitted the allegations in the SOR. He submitted additional 
information in support of his request for a security clearance. (Item 4)  
 
Applicant is 52 years old and married to a PRC citizen and resident. He was 
divorced from his first wife in May 2005. He has three children from his first marriage. 
Applicant met his current wife in December 2004 in a foreign location near where he 
worked for a government contractor. They started dating in May 2005. They married in 
September 2006. Applicant has a 14-year-old step-son in his current marriage. He also 
traveled to the PRC in September 2006 with his wife to visit her family. That trip is when 
he met his mother-in-law for the first time. Applicant visited his wife in the PRC in June 
and October 2008. Applicant’s step-son and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
the PRC. His wife and her son have lived in the PRC since June 2008 (Items 4, 5, 6)  
 
Applicant is a senior operations coordinator for a government contractor. He has 
20 years of U.S. Army service. He previously held a Secret security clearance in the 
Army. He seeks a security clearance to perform his current job. (Items 4-6) 
 
According to an interview with a government investigator on December 11, 2008; 
confirmed in his interrogatory answers made on May 3, 2009; and in his SOR Answer; 
Applicant gave his wife money to purchase a house in the . She lives there with her son. 
This purchase occurred in June 2008. Applicant is not a legal owner of this property 
because he is not a citizen of the PRC. Applicant’s wife is seeking a U.S. visa and 
would like to reside in the United States with Applicant after his current contract expires. 
Applicant is sponsoring his wife for the visa. She intends to become a U.S. citizen when 
she is eligible. Applicant gives his wife $4,000 monthly to support her and her son, and 
 
 
 
 
 
3
his mother-in-law. Applicant voluntarily pays for his step-son’s education. He has 
telephone contact with his wife and step-son daily. (Items 4-6) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts relating to the PRC. The PRC is 
a one-party Communist totalitarian state. It has an economy growing at 10% annually, 
and expanding military forces, including its naval forces. It engages in industrial and 
military espionage on a regular basis against the United States and other countries.  
The United States and the PRC have been rivals since 1948, when the Communists 
took control of mainland China, and the Nationalist government fled to the island of 
Taiwan. Taiwan remains an issue of contention between the two countries. The U.S. - 
China Economic and Security Review Commission=s 2006 report to the U.S. Congress 
found the PRC has a large and aggressive intelligence gathering operation in the United 
States, particularly in the scientific and military fields.  The PRC engages regularly in 
military, economic, and industrial espionage, including stealing nuclear weapons 
technology, missile design information, and commercial technology. The PRC also 
obtains commercial information through the use of front companies, buying dual-use 
technologies, and the direct collection of technology by non-intelligence agencies and 
individuals. The Peoples Liberation Army (PLA) is integrated into the civil industrial base 
in the PRC, known as the “digital triangle.” The 2007 Report to Congress of the U.S.-
China Economic and Security Review Commission (Item V at Page 102) states the 
linkages between the military and Chinese commercial information technology 
companies and the R&D institute are longstanding, “as telecommunications and 
information technology in China were originally under military auspices and the 
commercial relationships with state and military research institutes remain important.” 
Additionally, the U.S. State Department reported the PRC has a poor human rights 
record, including but not limited to, denial of free speech and press, fair and open trials, 
and other basic rights recognized by the international community. It also suppresses 
political dissent, using arbitrary arrests, forced confessions, and mistreatment of 
prisoners as part of its operational methods to maintain control of its population. The 
U.S. State Department notifies visitors to the PRC that they are expected to register 
with the police within 24 hours of arrival in the PRC. (Items I to XV) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
 
 
 
 
 
4
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
 
 
 
 
 
5
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, five of which may be potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that 
the individual's access to protected information may involve unacceptable 
risk to national security; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation; 
 
(f) failure to report, when required, association with a foreign national; 
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence service; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
 Applicant has ties of marriage, affection, and financial investment in the PRC, 
which raise a heightened security risk. He has daily contact with his wife and her son. 
They are citizens and residents of the PRC. The ties of affection and loyalty to his wife 
make Applicant subject to a risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion by agents of the PRC. AG ¶ 7 (a) applies.  
 
 These same familial connections to his wife and her son create a potential for a 
conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligations to protect U.S. classified information 
and his desire to continue to help his wife financially and emotionally. Applicant gives 
her $4,000 monthly to support her. He gave her money to buy a house in the PRC.  AG 
¶ 7 (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant lives with his wife when he visits her in the PRC. That relationship 
creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion 
because he will seek to protect her and her son, and the house for which he paid. That 
desire makes him subject to PRC pressures, if they were to be applied. The 
requirement to register within 24 hours of arriving in the town where his wife lives also 
places a risk on Applicant. AG ¶ 7 (d) applies. 
 
 Next, Applicant’s $4,000 monthly stipend to his wife, and the cost of the house in 
the PRC, for which Applicant paid, creates a substantial financial and property interest 
in the PRC for Applicant. The desire to protect that investment could subject Applicant 
to a heightened risk of PRC influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 7 (e) applies.  
 
 Finally, Applicant owns property in the PRC and supports his wife who lives there 
and is a PRC citizen. He visited her regularly in 2008. This course of conduct makes 
Applicant vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by the PRC because of his 
familial and financial connections to the PRC. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising under 
this guideline: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and, 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 From these mitigating conditions, only AG ¶ 8 (b) may have some application. 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen, and served in the U.S. Army for 20 years. He held a security 
clearance during his Army service. He understands the requirements of holding a 
security clearance. As an American, he should have life-long relationships and loyalties 
to the United States. However, they are counter-balanced by his voluntary marriage to a 
PRC citizen and resident, and the substantial financial support he provides his wife, 
currently living in the PRC. With his military experience he should know of the PRC’s 
historical espionage activities and the nature of a communist government. AG ¶ 8 (b) is 
not sufficient to mitigate the disqualifying conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the “whole-person” concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s marriage creates potential 
for pressure and coercion. He knew the citizenship of his wife when he married her. He 
has visited her three times in the PRC from 2006 to 2008, provided significant financial 
support to her for three years, and gave her money to purchase a house in the PRC. 
His financial interests in the PRC are substantial. Applicant was an adult when he 
entered into this relationship.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Foreign Influence:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
