 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-00643 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline 
for drug involvement. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing   
(e-QIP) on July 2, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were 
unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
1 
 
On June 23 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant submitted a notarized, undated Answer, which was received by DOHA 
on July 13, 2009. Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline H and Guideline E 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on August 31, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on the same 
day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 9, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on October 6, 2009. Government counsel offered three exhibits, marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. I took 
administrative notice of two documents provided by the government, identified as 
Hearing Exhibits I and II. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented the 
testimony of four witnesses. He also offered seven exhibits, marked as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript on October 13, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the 
Statement of Reasons, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant, who is 23 years old, was born in Russia, and immigrated to the United 
States in 1997 at the age of 11. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from a U.S. university in May 2008. 
Applicant has been employed by the same defense contractor since graduating college, 
and is currently lead engineer on a telecommunications project. Applicant is single and 
has no children. He has a girlfriend, who resides in Russia. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 17-23). 
 
In 2000, when Applicant was about 14 years old, he began using marijuana 
because of curiosity and peer pressure. He used it in his freshman year in high school, 
but more heavily -- several times per week -- during his sophomore year. He decreased 
his use to once per week during his senior year. He continued using marijuana while in 
college, again smoking it most heavily during his second year, when he used it two to 
three times per week. In December 2006, he became involved in boxing and decreased 
his use in order to become more physically fit. During his junior and senior years, his use 
decreased to about once every two to three months. Applicant estimates his total use 
                                                 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the 
Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was 
issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
between 2000 and 2007 as 650 times. Applicant also purchased marijuana for his own 
use, and sometimes sold it to friends. He testified that he never sold it for profit. 
Applicant was aware when he used marijuana that it was illegal. Applicant and his 
friends experimented with growing marijuana. They did not smoke the plant, but used 
parts of the plant in brownies, and then destroyed it. Applicant has never repeated this 
activity. Applicant last used marijuana in December 2007, about six months before 
finishing college. (GE 2; Tr. 23, 26-30, 36, 54) 
  
In 2003, while in high school, Applicant used cocaine for the first time. Between 
2003 and 2007, he used it approximately nine times, in social settings. He and his friend 
sometimes purchased it. Applicant last used cocaine in May 2007. He also used other 
illegal substances including psychedelic mushrooms (psilocybin), inhalants, and 
prescription drugs. He tried mushrooms one time. He used the inhalant nitrous oxide less 
than 10 times between 2003 and 2006. Applicant also sometimes shared Valium, 
Vicodin, or Adderall when they were prescribed for his friends. Although they were not 
prescribed for him, he used these painkillers about ten times between 2003 and 2007. 
(GE 1, 3; Tr. 30-38, 40-42) 
 
Occasionally, Applicant talks with two friends by telephone with whom he used 
drugs in the past. They do not live in the same city as Applicant. They no longer use 
illegal drugs, nor does Applicant's current roommate. Applicant stopped using illegal 
drugs about six months before he graduated college because he “got sick of them and I 
was like, you know, it’s time for a new and better life.” He has no intent to use illegal 
drugs in the future, and testified that he is, “basically done with that…I’m never going to 
revisit that.” (Tr. 50) Drug tests were administered to Applicant by prospective employers 
in February and June 2008. He passed both tests. He has never had drug counseling or 
participated in a drug treatment program. Applicant disclosed his drug use on his security 
clearance application, during his security interview, and in his interrogatory responses. 
(GE 1, 2, 3; Tr. 48-53, 56) 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor submitted a letter of reference. After supervising 
Applicant for one-and-one-half years, he noted that Applicant shows good judgment, and 
is responsible and trustworthy. He volunteers for additional tasks, and on one project, 
assumed the leadership role when the leader was not available. He has been with 
Applicant at social events and found that Applicant was discreet in his behavior, and he 
showed good judgment when discussing professional matters in social settings. He 
recommends Applicant be granted a security clearance (AE A).  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
 
3 
 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised AG.3 
Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary 
decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the 
government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the 
government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate 
the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an 
applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
                                                 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Of the eight disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 25, the following are relevant:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant admits to illegally using marijuana, cocaine, inhalants, mushrooms, and non-
prescribed medications. He sometimes purchased the marijuana and cocaine. He also 
experimented with growing marijuana. He used marijuana over a seven-year period, 
beginning when he was 14 and ending when he was 22. Applicant’s marijuana use was 
frequent, long-standing, and demonstrated poor judgment and willingness to break the 
law. Both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 26 includes two relevant mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Between the ages of 18 and 22, Applicant used cocaine, mushrooms, inhalants 
and painkillers infrequently, averaging about twice per year in each case. His use of 
marijuana is more problematic, because it was frequent and long-standing. However, 
Applicant credibly testified that he ended his use in December 2007, more than two 
years ago. Since then, he has been working steadily at a full-time, professional position. 
According to his supervisor, he is performing responsibly, and is trustworthy and 
 
5 
 
 
6 
dependable. These facts support a finding of current trustworthiness and reliability. AG 
¶ 26(a) applies. 
 
 Mitigation is also available under AG ¶ 26(b) (1) through (3). Applicant no longer 
associates with drug users. He does not live in the same city as his friends with whom 
he used drugs. He does sometimes speak with these two friends by telephone, but they 
also have ended their illegal drug use. He is no longer in the college environment where 
he used drugs, and his current roommate does not use drugs. Applicant has abstained 
from illegal drugs for more than two years, and both of the drug tests administered by 
employers in 2008 were negative. His conduct demonstrates a commitment to avoiding 
illegal drug use. AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under the guideline in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs between the ages of 14 and 22. Most were used on 
an occasional basis, but his marijuana use was frequent and long-standing. He was 
motivated by a desire to fit in with his friends. He ended his marijuana use in December 
2007, and has refrained from using illegal drugs for more than two years. He decided on 
his own to end his drug use when he realized that he was finishing college, entering the 
work world, and wanted to change his lifestyle. He fully disclosed his drug use during 
the security clearance process. He now holds a responsible, full-time job where he has 
performed dependably for the past one-and-one-half years. His decision to end his 
illegal drug use, as well as his demonstrated on-the-job reliability, show increased 
maturity and reflect positively on his current trustworthiness.  
 
 
 
7 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. for all these reasons, I conclude applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the drug involvement guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.f.:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
