 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-01794 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on September 2, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
 
 On August 7, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
Applicant signed her notarized Answer to the SOR on September 2, 2009, in which she 
admitted to all the allegations in the Statement of Reasons. She also requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 1, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on October 9, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 6, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 8, 2009. 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which were marked and 
admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and offered eight 
exhibits, which I marked and admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through H. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on December 17, 2009. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts relating 
to Taiwan, set forth in a summary marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, with 15 attached 
documents. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general 
knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 35 years old, was born in Taiwan and earned a bachelor’s degree 
there in 1996. She immigrated to the United States in 1997, at the age of 23, to further 
her education. In 1999, she earned a master’s degree in Business Administration at a 
U.S. university. She became a U.S. citizen in July 2008, and received her U.S. passport 
in September 2008.3 She has worked for the same federal defense contractor since 
1999, receiving the highest performance ratings. (GE 1; AE D, E; Tr. 52-54, 60) 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 At her security interview, Applicant informed the agent that she held a valid Taiwanese passport, which 
she had last used in 2006, before becoming a U.S. citizen. As a result of the interview, she realized that 
the foreign passport represented a security concern for the government, and promptly destroyed it at her 
home. A short time later, she received a letter informing her of the proper method to destroy it. She sent 
 
 
3
                                                                                                                                                           
 
Applicant married in 2003. Her husband and his family are U.S. citizens. He is a 
petty officer in the Navy, and has held a security clearance since 1994. Their daughter, 
aged three, was born in the United States (GE 1; AE H; Tr. 35, 41). 
 
 When Applicant lived in Taiwan, she had a strong attachment to her 
grandfather, who raised her while her mother worked. Applicant traveled to Taiwan to 
visit her ailing grandfather in 1999 and 2000, and then in 2002 to attend his funeral. 
Applicant testified that after he died, she had little reason to return to Taiwan, and has 
only visited once since then, in 2006. When there, she stays with her mother (AE B; Tr. 
48-49, 72)  
 
Applicant’s divorced parents are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Her mother, 
60 years old, was born in Taiwan and resides there. She was self-employed as an 
internet service provider and has no contact with the Taiwanese government. She 
retired in 2007 because she planned to spend more time in the United States with 
Applicant's daughter. Although Applicant‘s relations with her mother are strained, they 
have been in touch frequently since the birth of Applicant's daughter in 2006. Applicant 
stated in her security interview that she talks with her mother about 3 times per week 
and emails once every two weeks. Applicant’s husband testified that she talked to 
family in Taiwan about once per week before her grandfather died in 2002, and 
currently talks with her mother about once every two weeks. Applicant's mother came 
to the United States about three to five times per year between 2006 and 2008 to take 
care of Applicant's daughter. In 2009, she visited twice. Her last visit occurred in 
September 2009 when she came to accept her permanent resident card. (GE 2; AE B; 
Tr. 29, 39, 45-46, 65, 68-69) 
 
Applicant sponsored her mother for permanent U.S. resident status. As of the 
date of the hearing, her mother has been approved for permanent resident status and 
has received a “green card.” Applicant's mother is aware that Applicant is applying for a 
security clearance. (GE 2; AE F, G; Tr. 46). 
 
Applicant’s mother owns a home and two income properties in Taiwan. She 
plans to sell them in anticipation of moving to the United States. As of the hearing date, 
she had obtained a buyer for one property, and had contacted a realtor to sell the 
second property. When both are sold, she will sell her residence. (Tr. 47, 69-70). 
 
Applicant's father, 62 years old, was born in China (PRC) and is a citizen and 
resident of Taiwan. Applicant thinks he used to be a salesman, but is unaware of his 
current employment. She spoke to him in approximately 1997, when she moved to the 
United States. After 1997, she saw him at her grandfather’s funeral in 2002, and then 
did not speak to him again until 2008, when her mother requested it. “I have been 
 
a notarized letter indicating that she had already destroyed it (the record does not indicate the addressee 
of the letter). Possession of a valid foreign passport is a security concern under Guideline C, which is not 
alleged in this case. 
 
 
4
                                                
estranged from my father, and that is why I was not, and will not, be sponsoring him for 
his green card to come to the United States, and I do not have any intention to have 
additional further relationship with him, really.” (Tr. 49, 65-66) 
 
Applicant's grandmother was born in China, and is a Taiwanese citizen. Before 
she retired, she was a doctor. Applicant used to talk with her by telephone 
approximately twice per month. However, she currently suffers from Alzheimer’s 
disease, and resides in a community home in Taiwan.4 Applicant has not been able to 
see or speak to her since early 2006. She has no other family in Taiwan. Applicant has 
an aunt and uncle who are naturalized U.S. citizens and live in the United States. 
Applicant does not provide financial support to any family members. She has a 401(k) 
account through her company and an individual retirement account. Her husband will 
receive a Navy pension in the future (GE 1, 2; AE A; Tr. 72-74, 76, 79). 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts derived from the documents 
submitted for administrative notice. Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United 
States does not support Taiwan independence, in keeping with the “one China” policy. 
However, it continues to maintain strong unofficial relations with Taiwan. The United 
States supports Taiwan’s membership in appropriate international organizations where 
statehood is not a requirement for membership and also supports its meaningful 
participation in appropriate international organizations. 
 
 Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China (PRC) have significant economic 
ties, which are attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its 
location, Taiwan has a particular interest in information from the United States that 
could aid it in its own defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from 
the PRC. The PRC maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau 
utilizing PRC nationals with Taiwanese connections.  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).5 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
 
4 Applicant's family has moved her grandmother between Singapore and Taiwan, but as of the date of 
the hearing, she was living in Taiwan. (Tr. 79) 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
5
                                                
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or 
is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target 
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(e): 
 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
6
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information. 
 
Applicant has foreign family ties through her parents and grandmother, who live 
in Taiwan. She has visited Taiwan four times since 1999, and she stays with her 
mother during these visits. Such ties do not automatically disqualify an Applicant from 
obtaining a security clearance. However, Taiwan both maintains defenses against the 
People’s Republic of China, and has economic ties to it based on history and proximity.   
Family ties in Taiwan raise security concerns because of the potential for foreign 
influence. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. 
 
The foreign influence guideline also includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. Under AG ¶ 8, the following mitigating conditions are relevant:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest; 
 
Applicant has three family members in Taiwan: her father, mother, and 
grandmother. She has been estranged from her father for several years and has no 
current relationship with him. Her grandmother suffers from Alzheimer’s disease. The 
remaining family member, Applicant's mother, is the primary concern. However, she is 
retired, and even when employed, she did not have a high-profile or government-
related job. Moreover, she is in the process of obtaining U.S. citizenship, and planning 
to move the United States to be with her granddaughter. It is unlikely that Applicant 
would be exploited because of any of her three family members in Taiwan. Mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
 
7
 
Applicant has an ambivalent relationship with her mother. Although they have 
strained interactions when they are together, Applicant did help her mother obtain U.S. 
permanent residency. Their relationship rests primarily on Applicant's mother’s desire 
to maintain ties with Applicant's daughter. On the other hand, Applicant's longstanding 
ties to the United States weigh in her favor when evaluating the question of potential 
conflicts of interest. She earned an advanced degree here. She married a U.S. service 
member, and her daughter is a native-born U.S. citizen. She has retirement accounts 
here. She has provided support to the federal government for more than ten years 
through her job with a defense contractor. I conclude that she would choose these 
strong U.S. ties over her foreign connections, in the event that a conflict of interest 
arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Foreign family ties raise security concerns because of the potential for conflicts 
of interest and exploitation. Here, Applicant’s ongoing relationship with her mother in 
Taiwan raises such concerns. She is in frequent contact with her mother, and she has 
traveled to Taiwan four times since 1999. However, Applicant’s strong ties to the 
United States through her education, her husband, her daughter, and her investments 
represent substantial ties to the United States. She has provided support to federal 
contracts since 1999. Given Applicant's significant ties to the United States, I conclude 
that she would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.   
 
 
 
8
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a. - 1.d.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
