 
 
 
 
1
                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
                       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-04480 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On April 13, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 17, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on or about October 19, 2009, and requested a 
hearing.  DOHA assigned the case to me on November 3, 2009, and issued a Notice of 
Hearing the same day. The case was heard on November 19, 2009, as scheduled.  
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C in 
 
 
 
 
2
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 4, 
2009.      
                                                      
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the five allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of the SOR 
under Guideline E. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old and married to his second wife. He was born in the 
northern section of Iraq and graduated from high school in 1972. From October 1973 to 
July 1977, he was conscripted into the Iraqi army. After finishing the military term, he 
decided to leave Iraq because of Saddam Hussein’s regime. He went to Country One 
until 1980 when he was accepted as an immigrant to Country Two.  He left Country Two 
in May 1982 and moved to the United States to live with and work for his brother. (GE 1, 
2; 5.) From August 1982 until June 1983, he had no legal status with Country Two and 
was in the United States illegally, as he had overstayed his visa. (GE 4.) While here, he 
learned from the U.S. Office of Immigration that this government was preparing to 
deport him.1 (Id.) 
 
 In early spring 1983, through his family, Applicant met an American woman, who 
had two children. After relating his immigration problems to her, they agreed to marry so 
he could avoid deportation. (Tr. 39.) In June 1983, they went to another state and got 
“drunk and married.” (GE 5 at 13.)  He became a permanent resident shortly thereafter. 
(Tr. 20; GE 5 at 4.) He admitted that initially their marriage was a “business 
relationship,” but over time they became a family and he grew to love her. (Tr. 59.) 
Although he offered to give her money as part of the marriage arrangement, he never 
did. (Tr. 40.) They lived together as man and wife until June 1985. While married, he 
supported her children. He has not had contact with her since 1985. (GE 1.)  He 
became a U.S. citizen in April 1992. 
 
 In May 1993, Applicant married his current wife, who was born in Iraq.  He 
sponsored her into the United States and she became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2000. (GE 1; Tr. 42-43.)  They have no children.  
 
 From July 1990 to May 2004, Applicant worked as an auto mechanic. He then 
obtained a position with a defense contractor, as a linguist for the U.S. Army and 
deployed to Iraq, where he was in combat multiple times. (GE 4 at 5.) He speaks 
English, Arabic, and Greek. He returned to the United States in December 2005 after 
learning that his mother was ill. He was unemployed for six months and then resumed 
work as a linguist, returning to Iraq in June 2006.  
 
 In mid-May 2007, Applicant’s employer terminated him after he was involved in 
an alcohol-related incident on base, in violation of General Order Number One pertinent 
                                            
1It is not clear in the record whether Applicant was to be deported to Country One 
or Iraq. 
 
 
 
 
3
to consumption of alcohol in a combat zone. (GE 7.)  When Applicant came home one 
evening, he discovered that his roommate and friends were consuming alcohol in their 
trailer. After the military police arrived, everyone in the trailer was arrested and taken to 
the military police station. (GE 5, 7; Tr. 32.) Later, they were sent home to the United 
States. In an interview with a government investigator, he admitted that he had a drink 
of alcohol. (GE 5 at 11.) On May 21, 2007, he received an Installation Bar Order, 
barring him from working in Iraq for one year. (GE 6.) Applicant appealed the Order, and 
on May 25, 2007, the commanding officer lifted that Order and allowed him to return to 
work. (Tr. 33; AE C.) He subsequently worked for another defense contractor as an Iraqi 
advisor from June 2007 until February 2008, when he returned home because he no 
longer held a security clearance. (Tr. 35.) He was unemployed until April 2009, when he 
accepted his current position as an Army linguist for which he needs a security 
clearance. (GE 1, 4.) While deployed, he worked in a volatile area of Iraq. He helped the 
U.S. Army form an Iraqi ground force. (Tr. 22.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant married an American woman in 1983 to avoid 
deportation and that he failed to disclose the circumstances around that marriage when 
he completed a Counterintelligence and Security Screening Questionnaire (CIS) in May 
2004 (GE 2), another one in June 2006 (GE 3), and during an investigation by the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) after the marriage.  
 
  Applicant admitted that the circumstances surrounding his marriage are not 
contained in the two forms, but he denied that he withheld information from the 
government. Applicant explained that he did not personally input the answers into the 
two CIS forms. Rather, he discussed his answers with government investigators on both 
occasions, who then filled in the forms. (Tr. 57.) He did not sign the forms or review 
them at the end of the interview.2 (Tr. 57.) He asserted that he discussed the 
circumstances surrounding his first marriage and his desire to avoid deportation with the 
investigators. (Tr. 58.) He thinks that the investigator, who interviewed him for the 
second CIS in 2006, relied on information included in the 2004 CIS. (Tr. 52.) The first 
interview took a couple hours; the second interview took about twenty minutes. (Tr. 51-
52.) He disclosed the circumstances surrounding his first marriage in the CIS he 
completed in April 2009. (GE 4.) He did not try to hide any information from the 
government. (Tr. 53; 58.) He asserted, “I never have, sir. I never will. I mean I’m not 
ashamed, or I’m not scared.” (Tr. 53.)  He denied that he intentionally failed to disclose 
the “business arrangement” to INS during an interview. (Tr. 41.) He hired a lawyer to 
assist him in resolving the situation with the INS.3 (Tr. 40.)  
 
 Applicant submitted eight Certificates of Appreciation for his work in Iraq. (AE A) 
Applicant received the Commander’s Award for Civilian Service for his work from July 6, 
2006, to July 1, 2007, as the senior interpreter for Iraqi ground forces. According to the 
commander, Applicant displayed “unquestionable courage and dedication to duty. In 
                                            
2Question 6.2 of the May 2004 CIS contains an error. Applicant’s former spouse did not work at a 
casino in Las Vegas as recorded on GE 2. She worked in a restaurant in her home state. (Tr. 44.)   
3There is no evidence that the INS took any action after interviewing Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
4
addition to his bravery, [Applicant’s] eloquent style, perfect Arabic, and professionalism 
set him far above his contemporaries.” (AE A at 9.) He also received Certificates of 
Appreciation on December 2005, June 16, 2006, and December 26, 2006. (AE A.)  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d, that Applicant withheld 
information about the underlying reasons for his first marriage. Although Applicant 
admitted those allegations in his Answer, he denied that he intentionally falsified 
information to the government while testifying.   
 
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it.  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does 
not establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred.  An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time the omission occurred. (See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 
2004)). 
 
Based on the record evidence, which includes the fact that English is not 
Applicant’s native language, that the CIS forms were not verified, that one of those 
forms contains a mistake, that Applicant disclosed the circumstances surrounding his 
first marriage in his April 2007 interview and in the April 2009 CIS, and that he was 
candid and not evasive during this hearing, his explanations and testimony are credible. 
Hence, said allegations are found in his favor. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged that Applicant married a woman for the sole purpose of 
avoiding deportation. SOR ¶ 1.d alleged that he violated a General Order regarding the 
use of alcohol in a combat area while he was deployed to Iraq.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying as to those allegations:  
 (e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
 
 
 
 
6
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; and 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
In 1983, Applicant married an American woman in order to avoid deportation. 
That conduct could create a vulnerability to exploitation, in that it may affect his 
community standing, if known. The evidence is sufficient to establish AG ¶ 16(e).  
Applicant was involved in a situation that violated a written regulation regarding the use 
of alcohol while on base in Iraq. AG ¶ 16(f) is established. The evidence supporting 
these two disqualifying conditions requires a balancing of resulting security concerns 
with any potentially mitigating matters, and shifts the burden to Applicant rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
AG ¶ 17 includes one condition that could mitigate the two security concerns 
arising under this guideline: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
As to the allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant candidly admits that he 
married a woman to avoid deportation in 1983. He also acknowledged that they 
subsequently lived as husband and wife, and that he supported her and her children. 
Although his past conduct cannot be condoned, it occurred more than twenty-five years 
ago and under circumstances unlikely to recur, as he became a U.S. citizen in 1992 and 
married his current wife in 1993. At this time, it appears that the circumstances 
surrounding that marriage are well known to his family. AG ¶ 17(c) is established. 
 
Within a few days of issuing an Installation Bar Order in May 2007 against 
Applicant, the Commander lifted the Order and allowed Applicant to return to work in 
Iraq. Obviously, the offense was minor and unique, and does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) is established as to the allegation 
contained in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
 
 
 
 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 55-year-old man, who 
was born in Iraq. In 1983, he married an American woman to avoid deportation and 
remain in the United States with his family. For the next two years, he and the woman 
became a family. He does not deny the questionable circumstances surrounding his first 
marriage. He has lived in the United States for the past 25 years, remarried, and held 
various jobs. In May 2004, he became a linguist for the U.S. Army, serving in a hostile, 
high-risk area in Iraq. He presented impressive commendations from his command 
regarding his service and assistance to our troops. He has made significant 
contributions to our national security. He would like to return to Iraq and work with the 
Army.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM  
Administrative Judge 
