                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 09-02666 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
I have carefully reviewed the administrative file, pleadings, and exhibits in this 
case and conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under the 
Financial Considerations adjudicative guideline. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on 
February 6, 2008. On August 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, 
as amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
1 
 
2 
 
 On September 22, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. She requested 
that her case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 15, 2009. The FORM 
contained documents identified as Items 1 through 12. By letter dated October 19, 
2009, a copy of the Form was forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any 
additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the 
file on October 29, 2009. Her response to the FORM was due on November 28, 2009. 
She did not file any additional information or objections within the required time period. 
The case was assigned to me for a decision on February 4, 2010. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR is comprised of 20 allegations that raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG F, Financial Considerations. Nineteen allegations raised financial delinquency 
concerns totaling $35,576, and one allegation raised a fraudulent check conviction in 
1998. (Item 1.) 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 15 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 
1.d., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., 1.k., 1.m., 1.n., 1.o., 1.p., 1.q., 1.r., and 1.s.); she denied 
four debts and documented that they had been paid in full (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., 1.e., and 
1.l.). She admitted that, in 1998, she was convicted of Fraudulent Check Under $500 
and was sentenced to a $45 fine or 30 days in jail. (SOR ¶ 1.t.) She provided 
documentation that she had made partial payments on the delinquent debts alleged at 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.d., and she also offered additional information to support her request 
for eligibility for a public trust position. Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. (Item 4 at 9-14; Ex. 11.) 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old, divorced, and the mother of a son, aged 14, and a 
daughter, aged 18. In September 2009, Applicant’s ex-husband stopped paying child 
support and tuition for their daughter, who is a college student. (Item 4 at 7; Item 5.) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Business 
Administration. In August 2005, she enrolled in a graduate program to acquire a 
master’s degree in Business Administration. She expected to receive her graduate 
degree in May 2008. She is employed as a provider relations representative by a 
government contractor.  (Item 5.) 
 
 In April 2009, Applicant suffered chest pains, went to the emergency room of her 
local hospital, and was diagnosed with a condition that required a heart catheterization. 
Applicant’s children also had medical concerns that required expensive treatments. In 
August 2008, Applicant told an authorized investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management that her three siblings had agreed to pay some of her children’s medical 
expenses. However, Applicant’s siblings were subsequently affected by the downturn in 
the economy and were unable to help as they had earlier agreed. Applicant has worked 
for her present employer since about 1989. Her gross annual salary is approximately 
$37,000. (Item 4 at 3; Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 6; Item 7 at 9; Item 12.)  
   
3 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. She believes her financial 
delinquencies began in 2003, when she suffered emotional distress at the death of her 
mother. The SOR identified approximately $35,576 in delinquent debt. Applicant 
admitted owing listed debts totaling at least $34,350.  (Item 1; Item 4; Item 7 at 10; Item 
8; Item 9; Item 10.) 
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal financial 
statement. Her net monthly income is $2,272.56. Her fixed monthly living expenses total 
$2,137 and are as follows: mortgage, $738; groceries, $300; clothing, $50; utilities, 
$300; car expenses, $500; medical expenses, $99; miscellaneous, $150. Additionally, 
she makes two monthly payments of $180.65 on her vehicle, and she has a cell phone 
payment of $129 each month. Applicant’s financial statement indicates that her monthly 
expenses exceed her monthly income by approximately $355. (Item 7 at 8.) 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant argued that she should not be treated more 
harshly than certain government officials who were responsible for questionable 
financial conduct. Nothing in the record suggests that Applicant has received financial 
credit counseling. (Ex. 4 at 1,15-25.)  
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, the administrative judge must apply the guidelines in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise trustworthiness concerns. Additional trustworthiness concerns are raised 
under AG 19(d), when an applicant has engaged in “deceptive or illegal financial 
practices such as . . . check fraud. . . .”  Since about 2003, Applicant accumulated 
considerable delinquent debt and was unable to pay or satisfy her financial obligations. 
5 
 
In 1998, she was convicted of Fraudulent Check Under $500.  The evidence is sufficient 
to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ 
Applicant=s financial delinquencies began in about 2003, when she suffered emotional 
distress at the death of her mother. Applicant has been steadily employed by her 
current employer since about 1989. While her financially delinquent behavior began 
several years ago, it continues unresolved at the present time, is likely to recur, and 
casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  Accordingly, 
I conclude that AG ¶20(a) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), mitigation can occur where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, some of 
Applicant’s financial problems arose when she suffered distress at the loss of her 
mother and apparently neglected her financial responsibilities. Applicant’s admitted 
financial delinquencies began in 2003 and continue to the present, during a time when 
she was steadily employed. While her mother’s death and its impact upon her were 
beyond her control, Applicant offered no explanation for her failure to resolve or settle 
her financial delinquencies over the subsequent six years when she was employed. I 
conclude that she failed to act responsibly in identifying and resolving her substantial 
debts. I find that AG ¶ 20(b) applies only in part as a factor for consideration in this 
case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received financial counseling. While she 
provided evidence of full payment of four debts and partial payment of two debts alleged 
on the SOR, her current monthly budget shows a deficit of approximately $355, making 
consistent future payments unlikely. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  AG ¶¶ 20 (e) and 20 (f) are not raised by 
the facts of this case.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is well-educated. She has 
a bachelor’s degree in Business Administration and is pursuing a master’s degree. She 
has had a steady job with the same employer for over 20 years. Her financial problems 
began at least six years ago and have continued to the present time. While she 
encountered a sad personal loss when her mother died, she failed to budget her 
resources over the last six years to satisfy her many debts, which now total over 
$34,000. She has failed to demonstrate that her financial problems will not continue to 
be a trustworthiness concern in the future. 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant cited examples of others, including national 
officials and politicians, who had engaged in questionable financial conduct and had 
escaped negative consequences. She argued that her conduct was no worse than 
theirs and she should also escape any negative consequences. Applicant’s argument is 
without merit. 
 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has previously addressed the argument that an 
applicant’s disqualifying conduct was “ameliorated by the more substantial misconduct 
of others.” The Appeal Board concluded: “At issue in this case is the security 
significance of Applicant's conduct, not the conduct of others. Therefore, the conduct of 
others and how management might have viewed that conduct in contrast to Applicant's 
conduct are not relevant factors for the Judge's consideration.” ISCR Case No. 01-
02677 at 7 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2002.) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
7 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a.:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.c.:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.e.:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.k.: Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.l.:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.m. – 1.t.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
