KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant testified that he received the pre-hearing guidance which advised him of his
right to have an attorney or persona representative at the hearing.  Applicant has a masters
degree from an American university..  Applicant has not demonstrated that he was denied due
process.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-06925.a1
DATE: 12/13/2013
DATE: December 13, 2013
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-06925
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Wilfredo A. Ruiz, Esq.
1The record does not reflect which party requested the hearing.
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 13, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On October 1, 2013, after
conducting a hearing,1 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert J. Tuider denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process;
whether the Department Counsel failed to meet her burden of production; whether the Judge failed
to consider all of the evidence; whether the Judge failed properly to weigh the evidence; and whether
the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is from Pakistan.  He came to the U.S. in the mid-1990s and became a citizen of
this country in the late 1990s.  He has a master’s degree in computer science from a U.S. university.
He married a U.S. citizen, divorcing her in 2011.  Applicant owns some land in Pakistan worth about
$15,000.  He owns no property in the U.S.  He has $7,000 to $10,000 in a 401k plan and about
$4,000 in a U.S. bank account.  Since becoming a citizen, he has voted in all U.S. elections in which
he was eligible.
Applicant’s father and four of his siblings are citizens and residents of Pakistan.  He
communicates with his father and with two of his siblings on a weekly or bi-weekly basis.  He has
two siblings who are citizens and residents of other western countries.  Applicant sends this family
about $400 a month.  
Applicant has a friend who works for the government of Pakistan.  He contacts this friend
about every other month.  Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for his character.
Pakistan has supported the U.S. in its efforts to remove the Taliban from power.  However,
the Taliban, al Qaida, and other terrorist organizations operate within Pakistan, and the U.S. has
identified several areas of that country that it considers to be safe havens for terrorists.  In addition,
some elements of the Pakistani government may be providing covert aid to terrorists in Pakistan.
Credible reports suggest that Pakistani authorities use wiretaps and monitor mail, telephone, and
electronic communications without the requisite court approval.  
The Judge’s Analysis
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(a): “contact with a foreign family member . . . or other person who is a citizen of
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or concern[.]”  
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(b): “connections to a foreign person . . . that create a potential conflict of interest
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information[.]”  
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(e): “a substantial . . .  property interest in a foreign country . . . which could subject
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation[.]”  
5Department Counsel attached copies of these letters to his brief.  Neither letter was included in the record,
though SOR cover letters have appeared in other case records.  The inclusion in the record of the kind of letters
Department Counsel attached to the reply brief can facilitate the resolution of issues such as the one before us.  
3
 The Judge concluded that three of the Guideline B disqualifying conditions were raised by
Applicant’s circumstances: 7(a),2 (b),3 and (e).4  In so concluding, he cited to evidence of
Applicant’s close family members who are citizens and residents of Pakistan, his frequent contact
with them, his financial support to them, and his property interests in Pakistan.  The Judge also
considered the nature of the Pakistani government and its human rights record.  Although noting that
there was no evidence that the government had targeted Applicant’s family, the Judge concluded
that it was not possible to rule out that terrorist groups might do so.  
In considering Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge noted that Applicant has significant
ties within the U.S.  However, weighing these ties with those Applicant maintains within Pakistan,
the Judge opined that there exists a threat to Applicant’s family not so much from the government
as from terrorist organizations there.  He concluded that evidence concerning Applicant’s ties within
Pakistan must be awarded greater weight than evidence of his connections within the U.S.
Discussion
Applicant contends that he was denied due process.  Specifically, he states that he was not
made aware of his right to employ counsel to represent him at the hearing and that he was denied
his right to call witnesses in his behalf.  Applicant’s appeal brief, and Department Counsel’s reply
brief, assert matters from outside the record.  Although we cannot consider new evidence on appeal,
we have considered such evidence insofar as it bears upon questions such as due process,
jurisdiction, etc.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01038 at 1-2 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2013).  
The reply brief asserts that Applicant’s SOR was accompanied by a DOHA cover letter that
included information about Applicant’s right to representation.  It also asserts that, prior to the
hearing, Department Counsel sent Applicant a letter advising him of the evidence to be submitted
as part of the Government’s case-in-chief.  Included in this letter was advice about Applicant’s right
to counsel.5  In addition, DOHA sent Applicant pre-hearing guidance that advised Applicant of his
right to be represented at the hearing by an attorney or some other personal representative.  This
guidance also provided information to Applicant of his right to present both testimonial and
documentary evidence, although with the caveat that witness production is the sole responsibility
6The SOR states that the Directive was sent to Applicant.
4
of the person intending to offer the evidence.  Applicant testified that he had received this letter.  Tr.
at 7.  In each of these documents the advice about representation and evidence was consistent with
the pertinent provisions of the Directive.6  We note that Applicant has lived in the U.S. for nearly
20 years and that he earned a master’s degree from a university in this country.  This evidence, along
with the general quality of his oral presentation and of written documents composed by him and
included in the record, demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that Applicant has sufficient
fluency in the English language and general sophistication to have enabled him to comprehend the
guidance provided him, both about his right to counsel and his right to present evidence, including
testimonial evidence.
Applicant cites to the Constitutional right to counsel.  The doctrine that Applicant has cited
is applicable to criminal law.  DOHA proceedings are civil in nature, and DOHA applicants are not
afforded the procedural protections received by criminal defendants.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-
21262 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 10, 2007).        
Applicant did not bring evidence or witnesses to the hearing.  However, upon
recommendation of Department Counsel, the Judge held the record open after the hearing to enable
Applicant to provide documentary evidence (Tr. at 10-11), and Applicant took advantage of that
opportunity, submitting several post-hearing documents that were included as Applicant Exhibits.
Applicant accompanied his exhibits by a letter.  Nowhere in this letter, or in his presentation during
the hearing, did Applicant express a desire to call live witnesses or claim to have been unaware of
his right to do so.  Indeed, his appeal brief does not list any actual witness whom he would have
called, nor does it contain any proffer of expected testimony that he wished to present.  Rather,
Applicant’s generalized, non-specific assertion that he was denied a right to call witnesses is raised
for the first time on appeal and is not supported by the record.  Based upon our examination of the
record as a whole, we conclude that Applicant was not denied the due process afforded by the
Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-12204 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 2013).
Applicant contends that the Government failed to meet its burden of production.  When an
applicant controverts an allegation in the SOR, the Government bears the burden of producing
substantial evidence of the facts supporting the allegation.  Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1.  The Directive presumes a nexus
between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines and an applicant’s security-worthiness.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-08063 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 19, 2013).  The presence of close relatives in
a country in which terrorists operate and/or which has a poor human rights record is significant in
Guideline B cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011).  Moreover,
the Government is not required to prove affirmatively that a country specifically targets U.S. citizens
in order to gather protected information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 29,
2009).  Factors such as the obscurity of foreign relatives or the failure of foreign persons to contact
those relatives do not provide a meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s circumstances pose
a security risk.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-13696 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009).
5
In the case before us, Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations.  Therefore, the
allegations were not controverted, thereby relieving the Government of its burden of production.
Nevertheless, the Government presented evidence such as Applicant’s security clearance application
and his answers to DOHA interrogatories, in both of which he discussed his connections in Pakistan.
It also presented numerous official notice documents regarding the geopolitical situation in that
country.  These documents, along with Applicant’s SOR admissions and his testimony at the
hearing, provide substantial evidence that Applicant has close relatives living in a country in which
terrorist activity occurs and in which the government monitors telephonic and electronic
communications, and that he has a significant property interest there as well.  Such evidence is
sufficient to establish a heightened risk that Applicant’s relatives or property could become a means
through which he could come to the attention of persons interested in acquiring U.S. classified
information and be subjected to pressure or coercion.  We find no error in the Judge’s treatment of
the disqualifying conditions.  Moreover, given the frequency of Applicant’s communications with
his Pakistani relatives and his numerous travels to that country, we find no reason to disturb the
Judge’s application of the mitigating conditions.  Applicant’s brief on appeal is not sufficient to
rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has he shown
that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-12875 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep.
17, 2013).  
  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
