 Applicant remarried after her background investigation was completed. Accordingly, her last name is now1
different from what was provided on the SOR. (Tr. 6)
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-080001
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by her financial
problems, much of which arose from excessive gambling and from her failure to file and
pay her state and federal taxes. Although she recently paid or otherwise resolved
several past-due debts, she did so only after receiving the SOR and despite having the
resources to start addressing her debts at least a year earlier. Significant doubts remain
about Applicant’s judgment and reliability. Clearance is denied.
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 The record closed on October 15, 2013, which was later than originally planned due to a Government4
shutdown between October 1 and October 11.
 The SOR listed only 25 allegations as “1.a - 1.z”. “SOR 1.z” was a typographical error that was corrected at5
hearing to read as “SOR 1.y.” (Tr. 14 - 17)
 See Directive E3.1.17.6
2
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 30, 2011. After reviewing the results of a subsequent background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information.  On April 10, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons2
(SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative
guideline  for financial considerations (Guideline F).3
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision
without a hearing. However, on June 19, 2013, Applicant asked that her case be
converted to a hearing. A copy of her request is included in the record as Hearing
Exhibit 1. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2013, and I convened a hearing
on September 17, 2013. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 -
5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and proffered three
exhibits, admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - C. Additionally, I left
the record open after the hearing to receive additional relevant information from
Applicant. Her timely  post-hearing submission has been included in the record, without4
objection, as Ax. D. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on September 25,
2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed approximately
$26,942 for 25 delinquent accounts. (SOR 1.a - 1.y ) Applicant admitted, with5
explanations, all of the SOR allegations except for SOR 1.d, 1.k, 1.l, 1.p, and 1.u. Her
denials were also accompanied by explanations. (Answer) 
Additionally, Department Counsel moved that the SOR be amended to conform
to information obtained at hearing,  by adding as SOR 1.z, the following allegation:6
You failed to file your state and federal income tax returns for tax years
2011 and 2012, as required.
3
I granted the motion without objection from Applicant, who admitted to the allegation.
(Tr. 88 - 90) Finally, Department Counsel moved, without objection, to withdraw the
allegations at SOR 1.g and 1.i, as duplicates of SOR 1.o and 1.w, respectively. (Tr. 15) I
granted the motion without objection from Applicant. Accordingly, the total amount of
debt at issue in this case was adjusted downward to $26,353. Applicant’s admissions
are incorporated herein as facts. Having reviewed the pleadings, transcript, and
exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom she has
worked since July 2008, when that company acquired a small defense contractor where
she had been working since July 2004. Before that, she had worked for another defense
since 1994. That company sponsored her first request for clearance, which was denied
for failure to disclose background information. Applicant re-applied in 1995 and, in 1996,
she was granted a security clearance, which she has held without interruption.
Applicant’s performance appraisal’s for the past seven years reflect excellent work and
reliability. She has established an excellent reputation in her workplace and in her
community for integrity and trustworthiness. (Gx. 1; Ax. B: Ax. C; Tr. 9, 35)
Applicant is a high school graduate and the mother of one child, now age 23, for
whom she still provides some financial support. Applicant has been married twice. Her
first marriage began in June 2007. They separated in 2008 and divorced in April 2009.
Applicant has been married to her current husband, a church pastor and small business
owner (personal trainer), since September 2012. (Gx. 1; Tr. 34, 68)
Applicant’s first husband was a truck driver, but also gambled and dealt in illegal
drugs. They met in 2004 in State A, where Applicant had been working since 1994. In
mid-2004, just before Applicant moved to State B to take a new job, she learned about
her then-boyfriend’s drug activity. She demanded he cease such conduct as a condition
of staying together when she moved. He stopped selling drugs, but continued to
gamble. Before they left State A, Applicant accompanied him to a casino to gamble for
the first time in her life. (Gx. 1; Tr. 46 - 49)
Applicant’s new job in State B paid her about $50,000 annually. However, when
Applicant, her daughter, and her boyfriend moved there, his brother, his brother’s
girlfriend and her four children moved in with them. Applicant was the sole income
earner and rented a five-bedroom house for about $1,200 a month. She also paid for all
utilities and food. Nonetheless, Applicant married her boyfriend in 2007. Applicant
continued to gamble, both at nearby casinos and during trips to Las Vegas, even after
she and her first husband separated in 2008. She estimates that she lost about $25,000
before realizing in late 2008 that her gambling was out of control. She sought help
through a church-based counseling organization and, aside from a day of gambling in
Las Vegas in 2010, has stopped gambling. (Tr. 50 - 56, 61 - 63, 80 - 81)
Applicant moved to her current location in State C in July 2012. The job she has
held since then pays $95,000 annually before taxes and other deductions. Applicant
claimed her finances are better since moving to State C because the cost of living is
4
much lower than in State B. Applicant estimated, based on her income and expenses
since moving to State C, that she has about $2,000 remaining each month. (Gx. 1; Tr.
68)
When Applicant submitted her e-QIPs for periodic re-investigations in 2009 and
2011, she disclosed most of the debts alleged in the SOR. She also disclosed that she
owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and State B about $13,000 in unpaid income
taxes that were being garnished from her wages. Applicant also listed about $5,000 in
debts owed to various unspecified creditors as a result of her gambling. Credit reports
obtained in her last two investigations further document all of the allegations in the
SOR. (Gx. 1 - Gx. 5)
Applicant’s tax debts arose when she decided, in 2004, to claim 10 exemptions
from withholding of taxes from her paychecks. She did this because she felt, as a single
mother of her then-teenage daughter, she needed  more cash in her paychecks each
week. However, each year at tax time, she did not have enough to pay the accrued
taxes and late payment penalties for the previous year. In 2008, the IRS contacted her
to collect a $15,000 debt for unpaid taxes from tax years 2004, 2005, and 2006.
Applicant entered into a repayment plan that satisfied that tax debt in September 2010.
(Gx. 1 - 3; Answer; Ax. A; Tr. 35, 56 - 57)
At the hearing, Applicant disclosed that she did not file her tax returns on time for
tax years 2011 and 2012. She testified that she had “not gotten around to it,” and that
she had not filed requests for extensions. As of the hearing, she had filed her 2011
return, but still owed the IRS $1,253. She paid that debt six days after her hearing in this
matter. She filed her 2012 tax returns eight days after the hearing and paid a $342
federal tax debt with her filing. Applicant currently claims three exemptions from
withholding because she still claims her adult daughter as a dependent as Applicant still
provides most of her support for school and medical costs. (Tr. 58 - 61, 82 - 85, 88 - 90;
Ax. D)
Applicant established that she has paid or otherwise resolved most of the debts
in the SOR. Applicant paid or resolved $15,859 of the $26,353 past-due debt alleged in
the SOR. In addition to providing tuition and medical support for her daughter, Applicant
also provides financial and tuition support to her sister, who is also in college.
Additionally, Applicant helps fund her husband’s small business by purchasing office
supplies and other consumables as needed. However, Applicant was interviewed about
her debts by a Government investigator in September 2011. Aside from her federal tax
debts, she did not act to repay or resolve any of her debts until May 2013. (Answer; Ax.
A; Tr. 37 - 45, 64 - 73, 83 - 86)
 See Directive. 6.3.7
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).10
5
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to8
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a9
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.10
6
Analysis
Financial Considerations
In addition to Applicant’s admissions, the Government presented sufficient
information to support all of the SOR allegations. Applicant accrued significant debt
beginning in about 2004. Her debts arose, in part, from gambling losses and from her
failure to file or pay her income taxes on time. Her debts remained largely unaddressed
until after she received the SOR in April 2013. These facts raise a security concern that
is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations); and AG ¶ 19(f) (financial problems that are
linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling problems, or other issues of security
concern); and AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same).
In response, Applicant submitted information that requires consideration of the
mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant receives partial benefit
here, because she is no longer married to her first husband, she no longer gambles,
and she has sufficient income to pay or otherwise resolve her remaining debts.
Nonetheless, Applicant could have started resolving her debts as early as July
2012, when she moved to State C, with its lower cost of living and her increased
income. She did not plausibly explain why she did not act to pay even her smaller
delinquencies using some of the $2,000 she claims to have each month after expenses.
Applicant has also exacerbated the Government’s concerns by continuing to neglect her
federal and state tax responsibilities. Based on all of the foregoing, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her financial problems. 
7
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record in the context of the whole-person
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 44 years old and has established a solid record
of performance since at least 2008. Her response to the SOR and her presentation at
hearing demonstrated she has a thorough grasp of the status of her debts. However,
she has continued to neglect her obligations regarding taxes, and she did not try to
resolve her debts until faced with revocation of her clearance. These factors undermine
confidence that her financial problems will not recur and that her debts do not reflect
adversely on her judgment and reliability. Available information about her finances still
raises doubts about her suitability for access to classified information. Because
protection of national security is the principle consideration in these adjudications, any
remaining doubts must be resolved against the individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as amended, and as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.z: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
