 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12803 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised under the financial considerations guideline. Accordingly, his request 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR listed 
security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) of the AG. In his Answer to the SOR, notarized on April 8, 2013, 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations, and requested a decision without a hearing. 
(Item 3) 
 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
prepared a presentation of the Government’s case in a FORM dated July 30, 20131 It 
contained the Government’s argument and documents to support the preliminary 
decision to deny Applicant's request for a security clearance. Applicant received the 
FORM on September 9, 2013. He was given 30 days from the date he received the 
FORM to file a response. He did not submit a response. The case was assigned to me 
on December 9, 2013. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
On December 12, 2013, Applicant forwarded to Department Counsel five 
documents. I consider this to be a request by Applicant to extend the deadline to submit 
a response. Department Counsel did not object; her memorandum is marked as 
Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant's request to submit a response to the FORM is granted, and 
his documents are admitted as Items 9 – 13. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He attended two years of community college, but did 
not receive a degree. He married in 1993, and did not list children in his security 
clearance application. He served as an enlisted member of the military from 1982 until 
his honorable discharge in 2007. He stated in his 2011 security clearance application 
that he held a secret security clearance since 2001, but in his Answer noted that he held 
one since 1984. He has been employed by a defense contractor since 2008. He is also 
a real estate investor. (Items 3, 4, 6) 
 
 In his 2001 security clearance application, Applicant lists no financial 
delinquencies. However, in his 2011 security clearance application, he listed numerous 
delinquent debts he had accrued in the interim that related to his real estate 
investments. At his 2011 security interview, he could not recall specifics of numerous 
properties or the associated loans, but estimated he had owned as many as eight 
investment properties simultaneously. He discussed loan balances varying from smaller 
second mortgages of about $41,000, to a primary loan of $440,000. Applicant met his 
mortgage payments by renting his properties. However, when the housing market 
crashed in 2008, his tenants lost their jobs and were unable to pay their rents. He 
contacted the lenders seeking ways to save the properties. He states in his Answer,     
“. . . I have spent most of my savings to prevent losing the properties that I owned.” He 
also sought assistance from a real estate attorney. He admits in his Answer that he 
defaulted on nine mortgage loans, all of which proceeded to foreclosure. (Items 3-5) 
                                                          
1 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 - 8) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The allegations in the SOR comprise the two mortgages on Applicant's residence 
and the defaulted mortgages on two investment properties. The residence has a first 
and second mortgage, which are both currently delinquent (allegations 1.a and 1.b). In 
April 2013, Applicant was offered two options to pay the second mortgage/home equity 
line of credit (HELOC): a payment plan of $130 per month, or a settlement of $13,628, 
25 percent of the outstanding debt. Applicant’s wife in the meantime, filed a bankruptcy 
petition, and included the debt. However, the petition is solely in her name.2 Applicant 
did not proceed with either option, and has placed the property for sale, in an attempt to 
secure a short sale. Applicant and his wife are divorced, and his wife is residing in the 
house. (Items 9, 10, 12) 
 
 Applicant does not believe he is indebted on the balances remaining after the 
foreclosures of the two investment properties alleged at ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. He submitted a 
letter from an attorney citing his state’s statute concerning these two properties sold 
following foreclosure. The letter states,  
 
As these sales were conducted by a mortgagee or trustee under power of 
sale contained in the mortgage or deed of trust, [Applicant] has no further 
liability to the lenders after the completion of these sales. See, [state] 
Code of Civil Procedure, §580d. 
 
In pertinent part, §580d states that 
 
580d. No judgment shall be rendered for any deficiency upon a note 
secured by a deed of trust or mortgage upon real property or an estate 
for years therein hereafter executed in any case in which the real 
property or estate for years therein has been sold by the mortgagee or 
trustee under power of sale contained in the mortgage or deed of trust. 
 
However, §580b from the state code states: 
 
580b. (a) No deficiency judgment shall lie in any event for the following: . . 
. (3) Under a deed of trust or mortgage on a dwelling for not more than 
four families given to a lender to secure repayment of a loan which was in 
fact used to pay all or part of the purchase price of that dwelling, occupied 
entirely or in part by the purchaser. [emphasis added]. 
 
Based on §580b, and the record evidence, Applicant does not reside in either of these 
properties, as they are rental properties for investment purposes. The release for liability 
does not apply to investment properties, and Applicant would be liable for a deficiency 
following the sale of his investment properties alleged at ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. 
 
 The attorney also advised Applicant that if he sells his primary residence through 
short sale, he will also be relieved of liability for any deficiency under the state code. 
                                                          
2 Applicant's wife also recently filed for divorce, which was final on November 10, 2013. (Item 9) 
 
4 
 
 
Under §580e, Applicant is not liable for payment of a deficiency after foreclosure on the 
property where he resides (allegations 1.a and 1.b) (Items 3, 13) 
 
 Applicant's delinquencies appear in his credit reports of July 2011 and October 
2012. (Items 7, 8) The status of the SOR debts follows. 
 
Residence, first and second mortgages, allegations 1.a, 1.b, totaling $571,515. 
Applicant's residence has a delinquent primary mortgage of $517,000 with Mortgagee B 
(¶ 1.b). He also has a HELOC of $54,515, secured by the same residence, with 
Mortgagee A (¶ 1.a). He was denied a modification under the Making Home Affordable 
program, but was approved for an “in-house” loan modification in December 2012. He 
did not accept the modification, however, because he was unable to afford the proposed 
monthly payment. Applicant stated in his April 2013 Answer he intends to try to short-
sell the property. If he is unsuccessful, he will attempt to negotiate a settlement or 
submit a deed in lieu of foreclosure. (Items 1, 3, 6) 
 
Investment property, first mortgage, allegation 1.c, $267,416. Applicant purchased 
an investment property in October 2006 with a loan from Mortgagee C. He defaulted on 
the loan, and the property was foreclosed. According to an Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) Form 1099-A, Acquisition or Abandonment of Secured Property, the outstanding 
balance on the loan was $267,416, and the fair market value of the property was 
$148,000. The Form 1099-A also indicates that Applicant was personally liable for the 
loan repayment. In November 2009, the property was sold at a trustee’s sale for 
$148,000. (Item 3) 
 
Investment property, first mortgage, allegation 1.d, $263,511. Applicant bought this 
property in October 2006. He defaulted on the mortgage loan, held by Mortgagee D, 
with an outstanding balance of $263,511. In May 2009, it was foreclosed. Applicant’s 
Form 1099-A shows the fair market value of the property was $93,500, and that 
Applicant was personally liable for the loan repayment. The property reverted to the 
lender for $93,000 at a trustee’s foreclosure sale on June 9, 2009. Applicant's 2009 
federal tax return, Form 4797, Sales of business Property, shows a loss of $67,530 on 
the property. (Items 3, 11) 
 
 Along with the above debts, Applicant's credit report of July 2011 lists numerous 
credit card accounts with individual balances up to $43,000. He also had two auto loans 
with balances totaling almost $65,000. None of the credit card or auto loans were 
delinquent. Although these debts are not alleged in the SOR, and will not be considered 
in determining Applicant's suitability for a security clearance, they can be considered for 
certain limited purposes.3 Applicant's October 2012 credit report shows the only 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 08-09232 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010). “Even without amending an SOR, a Judge may 
nevertheless consider unalleged conduct for certain limited purposes. These include assessing an 
applicant’s credibility, evaluating his evidence in mitigation, and considering the extent to which an 
applicant has demonstrated rehabilitation. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006). 
 
 
5 
 
 
delinquencies to be the first mortgage and HELOC on his residence, alleged at ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b. (Items 7, 8) 
 
 Applicant completed a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) in December 2012, 
showing that his gross monthly income, along with his wife’s, totaled $9,242. Their 
monthly expenses and debt payments totaled $7,778, leaving a monthly net remainder 
of $1,464. The monthly debt payments included $2,800 for their residential mortgages, 
and $1,300 for two auto loans. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
                                                          
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information . . . . 
 
I have considered the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative 
cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial 
analysis. 
 
Applicant’s debts stem from his investments in real estate. He bought numerous 
properties, holding as many as eight properties simultaneously. He purchased the two 
investment properties at ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d in October 2006, during the real estate bubble. 
His mortgages ranged from smaller HELOCs of $50,000 to $70,000 to substantial 
mortgages ranging up to $440,000. At least nine loans became delinquent and were 
foreclosed, and his two residential mortgage loans are currently delinquent. AG ¶ 19(a) 
and (c) apply. However, without further information about Applicant's income and 
expenses at the time he assumed these debts, I cannot determine if Applicant was 
spending beyond his means. The record contains insufficient evidence to support 
application of AG ¶ 19(e).  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions could potentially mitigate security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant's debts were numerous—he had as many as eight loans open 
simultaneously, and nine properties were foreclosed. They are also recent, because 
they are currently delinquent. As to recurrence, the housing crash and Applicant’s real 
estate ventures may not recur. However, his actions in the period preceding the crash 
are troubling: he bought multiple properties that he eventually could not support, and 
that ultimately resulted in many foreclosures. Applicant's conduct shows a lack of good 
judgment and willingness to engage in financially risky behavior. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 The national real estate market crash significantly affected Applicant's fortunes, 
and he could not predict or control that event. The file contains insufficient information to 
determine if any other events beyond Applicant's control contributed to his financial 
problems. For full mitigation under this condition, an applicant must act responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant states that he contacted lenders and spent money 
trying to retain his properties when the market changed, but the file lacks information 
about the specific actions he took in the years between 2008 and 2013. Applicant 
receives partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 Similarly, the record evidence is insufficient to show whether Applicant made 
good-faith efforts to repay creditors or resolve the debts. His financial problems are not 
under control. Applicant's loans on his primary residence, totaling $571,515, are 
delinquent. Although the residence is on the market, it is unknown whether he will be 
able to successfully short-sell it. The loans on the other two foreclosed properties listed 
in the SOR are also unresolved because, as investment properties, Applicant is liable 
for deficiencies on the balances after a foreclosure sale. Applicant's financial situation is 
not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Along with his employment by a defense contractor, Applicant is a real estate 
investor. He has owned as many as eight properties simultaneously. Although it 
appears he was able to carry this debt load in the past, his numerous real estate 
investments undermined his financial stability when the housing market crashed. His 
tenants lost their jobs and were unable to pay the rent. Ultimately, nine properties were 
foreclosed. He currently owns only his residence. The primary loan and HELOC on that 
property are delinquent. Applicant is attempting a short sale, but the house was unsold 
as of November 2013.  
 
 As to the two other foreclosed properties alleged in the SOR, Applicant believes 
he is not liable for the deficiencies remaining after their sale, based on state law. 
However, his state’s law only relieves him of liability as to his primary residence; it does 
not apply to investment properties. Therefore, applicant remains subject to pursuit by 
the lenders who foreclosed on the two properties cited at allegations 1.c and 1.d. Even 
if, arguendo, he were not liable for the deficiencies on the two investment properties in 
the SOR, Applicant’s risky behavior by taking on numerous properties that ultimately led 
to a debt load he could not support, and multiple foreclosures raises security concerns. 
The Government’s doubts about Applicant's suitability to hold a security clearance 
remain, and must be resolved in favor of the national interest.8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
