1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-13395
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 12, 2013
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on July 19, 2011. (Government Exhibit 1.)  On March 18, 2013, the Department
of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) concerning Applicant. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 15, 2013, and requested a
decision without a hearing. Applicant subsequently requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 9, 2013.
This case was assigned to me on August 1, 2013. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
August 19, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 10, 2013. The
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant Exhibits A
through P, which were also admitted without objection. Applicant asked that the record
2
remain open for the receipt of additional documents. The Applicant submitted Applicant
Exhibits Q through V in a timely manner, and they were admitted without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 17, 2013. The record
closed on October 2, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 65 and single. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks to
retain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant
admitted all the allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph. Those admissions are
findings of fact. He also submitted additional information to support his request for a
security clearance.
Applicant states that his financial difficulties began around 2006, with the
beginning of the global financial crisis. In addition to his personal residence, Applicant
owned a rental property. At this time, he was having issues with his renter, and
eventually found it difficult to pay the mortgages on both houses, as well as his other
debt. 
1.a. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a credit card debt in
the amount of approximately $17,000. This debt has been delinquent since around
2008. According to Applicant, he last made a payment on this account in approximately
June 2008. Applicant was upset by the response of the credit card company after he
made a partial payment on this debt, and has not made any payments since that time.
(Government Exhibit 4 at 61-63; Tr. 34-38, 43-45.) After the hearing Applicant made
contact with this debtor in an attempt to resolve the debt. (Applicant Exhibit R.)
Applicant also had some health issues that occurred after the hearing, which affected
his ability to work with the creditor. Notwithstanding, he has not yet reached any
payment arrangement with this creditor. (Applicant Exhibits Q, S, T, U, and V.) This debt
is not resolved.
1.b. Applicant admits that he was indebted to a mortgage company in the
amount of $324,000 for a first mortgage. This rental property was foreclosed upon in
2010 and sold. According to Applicant, he began having problems making his mortgage
payments on this property in 2006 or 2007, when he began having issues getting a
reliable tenant. He spent approximately two years and $24,000 trying to save this
property, and his personal residence, by using a company that was supposed to be
expert in helping people like Applicant (Company A). Eventually, Applicant figured out
this company was a scam, but it was too late to save this property. He has been in
3
contact with several governmental organizations at the local and state level regarding
the conduct of Company A. (Government Exhibit 4 at 7-16, 64, 68-72;  Applicant
Exhibits A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, L; Tr. 30-34.) The debt was resolved by the
mortgagor taking back the property. 
1.c. Applicant admits that he was indebted to a mortgage company in the
amount of $150,000 for a second mortgage on the rental house, which is also the
subject of 1.b, above. This debt was forgiven by the mortgage company and Applicant
received a Form 1099, “Cancellation of Debt,” in September 2011. (Applicant Exhibit N;
Tr. 40.) The amount of debt cancelled is $119,407.53. This debt has been cancelled.
1.d. Applicant admits that he filed bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the
Bankruptcy Code on May 21, 2010. He received the required credit counseling.
(Applicant Exhibit K.) Applicant failed to appear for a mandatory §3421(a) meeting of
creditors on July 6, 2010. The case was dismissed on July 9, 2010, and Applicant was
barred from refiling for 180 days from that date. (Applicant Exhibit M.) 
Applicant testified that he filed this bankruptcy at the behest of the head of
Company A. He stated, “I should say the bankruptcy was a part of the scam as well, as
it was explained to me. What [the head of Company A] was attempting to do was to stall
for time so that he could continue with negotiating [on the mortgages] although,
obviously, it was not true. But that was the reason for it - - for the bankruptcy.” (Tr. 34.)
Applicant also described the bankruptcy filing as a “stall tactic.” (Government Exhibit 4
at 9.)
About a year after filing for bankruptcy and having it dismissed, Applicant filled
out his e-QIP. (Government Exhibit 1.) Question 26.a. of the questionnaire asks whether
Applicant has filed a petition under any chapter of the bankruptcy code within the last
seven years. Applicant answered that question, “No.” When questioned by me as to
why he made this obviously false answer, Applicant replied, “I have no reason to - -
there is no way to justify that. All I can say is that it could have been that I was under the
impression that it wasn’t - - I don’t know - - it wasn’t bankruptcy. I mean I know that
sounds ridiculous. Actually, I have no answer other than it’s false.” (Tr. 41-43.) 
Mitigation
Other than the credit card debt described in 1.a, above, Applicant has no other
credit card debt. According to a personal financial statement Applicant completed in
September 2013 he is in fine shape financially. He has approximately $70,000 in
assets, not including his house, and a monthly net remainder of over $2,400. Applicant
was able to enter into a loan modification with the mortgage holder of his primary
residence. (Government Exhibit 4 at 17-28, 31; Applicant Exhibit P; Tr. 31-32, 46-47.)
Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from his manager. (Applicant
Exhibit O.) The letter, which is undated, states that Applicant is a person with a high
work ethic. His manager recommends Applicant without reservation.
4
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2, the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to
AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own
common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
5
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has a past-due debt of over $17,000, which has been due
and owing for several years. In addition Applicant had a house foreclosed upon, which
had mortgages of approximately $475,000. Finally, Applicant filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy in an attempt to “stall” the foreclosure. This bankruptcy was dismissed as
Applicant failed to appear a the meeting of creditors. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), a disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial difficulties have been in existence since at least 2008. He has not made any
effective attempts to resolve the seriously delinquent credit card debt, despite the fact
that he has the financial ability to do so. In addition, he has known of the Government’s
interest in his financial situation, and this debt in particular, for a considerable period of
time. This mitigating condition does not have application in this case. 
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”  It appears that Applicant’s financial problems were started
by his having a bad renter in his house. However, for two years he paid Company A
about $24,000 in return for their doing nothing for him. What is also disturbing is
Applicant’s misuse of bankruptcy to forestall the foreclosure, then his failure to tell the
6
Government of the filing. This mitigating condition does not have application in this
case.
AG ¶ 20(d) states it can be mitigating where, “the individual has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” The two mortgage
debts were resolved by the property being foreclosed upon and sold, and the additional
debt being cancelled. He has not paid, or made any good faith steps to pay, the credit
card debt. This mitigating condition does not have application in this case.
Applicant did not allege that AG ¶ 20(e) has any application in this case.
Applicant received the credit counseling required by the Bankruptcy Court.
However, looking at his entire financial situation at the present time, I cannot find that
“there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” as
also required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guideline F, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems for
several years, which have not been resolved. He made some very poor financial
choices, and has a long history of not paying his debts. Applicant’s conduct with regards
to his finances was not mitigated. Also of concern in determining whether Applicant
meets the adjudicative process factors is the situation regarding his false answer to the
question regarding bankruptcy. While not a determining factor against granting him a
clearance, it must be considered when deciding whether Applicant has mitigated the
allegations.
7
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent and continuing. I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also
cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); or that there is no likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation. Accordingly, the evidence supports denying his request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
