 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15147 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Corey Williams, Esq. 
 
 
December 5, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to 12 creditors in the approximate amount of $56,709. He also discharged debt 
through a 2005 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations 
security concerns, because his current debts were caused by a vehicular accident in 
2010 and nearly a year of unemployment during his recovery. He has acted responsibly 
with respect to his present debts by repaying one debt and listing the others on his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which is expected to be fully discharged at the end of January 
2014. He has completed financial management classes and lives within his current 
means. He now maintains health insurance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 9, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
 
2 
 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 2, 2013, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 23, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 23, 2013, scheduling the hearing for October 21, 2013. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left 
open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits and on November 27, 2013, Applicant 
presented AE J through AE R. Department Counsel had no objections to AE J through 
AE R and they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
October 29, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant is alleged to be indebted to 12 creditors in the 
approximate amount of $56,709. Applicant admits each of these debts. His credit 
reports reflect that each has been past due since approximately 2010. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He married in 2009, 
but separated from his wife shortly after their marriage. They reconciled in February 
2011.  He has two minor children and custody of his minor nephew. Applicant served in 
the Navy from April 2003 to March 2010. He achieved the rank of E-4. He was awarded 
the National Defense Medal; the Good Conduct Award; the Sea Service Deployment 
Ribbon; the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal; and the Global War on 
Terrorism Service Medal during his Navy career. (GE 3; AE L; Tr. 30-31, 39, 73.) 
 
 Prior to enlisting in the Navy, Applicant accrued a significant amount of 
delinquent debt. He attributed his debts to overspending on a girlfriend and being laid-
off from his position as a machine operator in a metal shop. He was young and 
inexperienced with finances at that time. Once in the Navy, his commander and security 
officer advised Applicant to file Chapter 7 due to his excessive indebtedness. Applicant 
took their advice and filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2005. His debts were 
discharged in September 2005. He testified that from 2005 to 2010 he closely watched 
his finances, reduced his spending, and only had one credit card. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; 
Tr. 32-35, 53-54, 63.) 
 
 Applicant had difficulties on the Navy advancement examination and was not 
selected for promotion. He was required to separate and was given an honorable 
discharge. After leaving the Navy, he worked as a personal trainer at a gym while 
looking for a higher-paying job from June 2010 to September 2010. He had no medical 
insurance at that time, but was living within his means. (Tr. 48-61.) 
 
3 
 
 In September 2010 Applicant was the victim of a hit-and-run accident when he 
was forced off the road on his motorcycle by a car. Applicant suffered serious injuries 
and was airlifted to a nearby hospital. His damages from the accident were not covered 
by his motorcycle insurance. SOR allegations in subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f 
relate to Applicant’s medical bills resulting from this accident. Applicant’s employment at 
the gym was terminated while he was recovering from the accident. He supported 
himself on state unemployment benefits until June 2011, when he was hired by a 
government contractor. He was unable to repay these medical bills from September 
2010 to June 2011. (Tr. 35-36, 51-65.) 
 
 Additionally, because he was unemployed after the accident he could no longer 
afford to pay for his apartment and other financial obligations. He moved in with his 
mother to reduce expenses and recuperate. He incurred a cancellation fee for his cable 
bill (subparagraph 1.d); a past-due cell phone bill (subparagraph 1.g); a delinquent 
credit card bill (subparagraph 1.h); an overdue land-line bill (subparagraph 1.i); a 
delinquent on-line account (subparagraph 1.j); and three delinquent loans he took out 
while still in the Navy (subparagraphs 1.k to 1.m) relating to his truck, his motorcycle, 
and safety equipment for the motorcycle. He attributes the delinquency of each of these 
accounts to his accident and resulting unemployment. He testified and the credit reports 
reflect that all accounts were in good standing until his accident. (Tr. 35-36, 39-47.) 
 
 Applicant testified that once he became employed in June 2011, he paid off the 
debt in subparagraph 1.g. He presented documentation showing this debt was satisfied. 
He credibly averred that he made small, intermittent payments on the other debts when 
his resources would allow, but found that with the interest rates, his small payments 
made no impact on his outstanding debts. In March 2013 he sought the advice of 
counsel. He asked the attorney to help him negotiate with his creditors. However, the 
attorney advised him the best option to address his financial delinquencies would be to 
file Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. Applicant followed the advice of his attorney. (AE O; AE Q; 
Tr. 42, 61-65, 73-74, 82.) 
 
 Applicant addressed each of the remaining 11 delinquent debts listed on the 
SOR in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition filed May 30, 2013. Applicant listed assets 
totaling $18,639 and liabilities of $89,124 in this Chapter 7 petition. A Meeting of 
Creditors was held on November 22, 2013, and the deadline to Object to Debtor 
Discharge was set for December 26, 2013. The debts have not yet been discharged, 
but Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney “fully expects that all of [Applicant’s] debts will be 
discharged during the last week of January 2014.” (AE G; AE H; AE I; AE P; AE Q; AE 
R; Tr. 37-38.) 
 
Applicant has actively worked to educate himself on financial matters to avoid 
future financial problems. He completed two different courses on personal financial 
management on September 24, 2013, and October 19, 2013, respectively. He created a 
household budget with the assistance of the credit management courses he participated 
in, which reflects he will have a monthly surplus of $970.26 once his debts are 
discharged. He testified he has learned not to overextend himself. He saves money by 
 
4 
 
couponing. He lives within his means and maintains vehicle and health insurance. He 
no longer rides a motorcycle.  (AE A; AE M; AE N; Tr. 39, 47, 52, 59, 74-80.) 
 
Applicant presented several letters of support from those that know him best. His 
current supervisor indicated that Applicant is “a great asset” to their division and “an 
exemplary employee.” His past supervisor called him the “embodiment of what Honesty, 
Courage, and Commitment means.” His coworkers find him to be honest and reliable. 
(AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE F; AE J; AE K.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to satisfy debts owed to 11 creditors in the approximate 
amount of $56,378, as alleged on the SOR. These debts have been past due since 
2010. His recent indebtedness comes after discharging an unspecified amount of debt 
through a 2005 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The Government established a case for 
disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant meets significant mitigating factors for financial considerations. While 
his financial difficulties are recent, they occurred as a direct result of Applicant’s hit-and-
run motorcycle accident and resulting unemployment. He carefully budgets his 
expenditures and now maintains insurance. His recent financial difficulties occurred due 
to circumstances that were largely beyond his control and are unlikely to recur. Further, 
his financial delinquencies do not establish recent poor judgment. Applicant acted 
responsibly toward his debts after his first bankruptcy discharge in 2005, until the 
unforeseen accident in 2010. While his accident in 2010 created excessive 
indebtedness, Applicant has acted responsibly by incurring no further delinquent debts 
since he was hired in 2011. He was unable, however, to meet the current financial 
needs of his family on his salary and address his delinquent debts incurred during his 
medical treatment and unemployment. He sought the advice of an attorney who advised 
him the best way to address his debts was to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He has 
followed this attorney’s advice and is going through the bankruptcy proceeding now. 
Under the circumstances, he is acting responsibly. Further, he has received a significant 
amount of education on how to avoid future debt. Applicant anticipates that he will have 
a significant amount of money left over after his monthly financial obligations are met 
once his bankruptcy is discharged. Moreover, bankruptcy is a legally viable option to 
discharge debt. While Applicant’s debts had not been discharged by the close of the 
record, he has been attempting to resolve his debts, in good faith, through this legally 
viable option. 
 
 Applicant has a distinguished history of acting with honor and valor. He can be 
trusted to monitor his finances closely and resolve his debts in the future. Applicant has 
acted responsibly by following the advice of his counsel and educating himself on how 
to avoid future debt. Applicant’s financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected by his supervisors and colleagues. He performs well at his job. His 
integrity and his military service record show Applicant is trustworthy.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
   
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
