 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-14293
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his use of illegal drugs and
his alcohol consumption. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background investigation, adjudicators
for the Department of Defense Clearance Adjudication Facility (DOD CAF) were unable
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request
for access to classified information.  On June 12, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a1
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
the adjudicative guidelines  for drug involvement (Guideline H) and alcohol consumption2
(Guideline G).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 9, 2013, and I convened a hearing on September
19, 2013. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2, which
were admitted without objection. (Tr. 14 - 15) Applicant testified and presented six
witnesses. He also presented five exhibits, which have been included in the record
without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - E. (Tr. 16 - 18) Additionally, I left the
record open after hearing to receive additional relevant information from Applicant. The
record closed on October 15, 2013, when I received Applicant’s timely post-hearing
submission. It has been included in the record without objection as Ax. F. DOHA
received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used illegal drugs
while possessing a security clearance between 2007 and May 2009, and between April
2011 and June 2011. (SOR 1.a) It was also alleged that Applicant was diagnosed as
opioid and alcohol dependent in June 2011. (SOR 1.b) Under Guideline G, the
Government alleged that, in September 2005, Applicant was arrested for driving under
the influence (DUI), a charge that was later dismissed, after failing a field sobriety test
(SOR 2.a); that in October 2010, he was arrested and charged with DUI, a charge that
was later dismissed, after driving off the road (SOR 2.b); and that on May 20, 2012,
Applicant consumed alcohol despite having been previously diagnosed as alcohol
dependent (SOR 2.c). 
Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR allegations. In addition to
his admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 30 years old. Since December 2011, he has worked as a senior
software developer with his current defense contractor employer, a 40-person company
that is subcontracted to a larger defense contractor. He previously held similar positions
with two other defense contractors beginning in July 2004. Applicant first received a
security clearance in connection with his work in January 2005. His 2011 e-QIP was
submitted for a periodic review of his eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant attended college from August 2002 until May 2008, when he received a
bachelor’s degree in mathematics, with a minor in English. At first, he attended full time,
but became a part-time student when he began an internship with a defense contractor
who eventually hired Applicant for a paid position. (Gx. 1)
3
Applicant began consuming alcohol in high school at about age 17. He drank
beer with friends as a means to help him socialize. His use of alcohol escalated to the
point he sometimes consumed 15 beers daily by himself. However, most of his drinking
in public was much more moderate. (Gx. 2; Ax. F; Tr. 65)
In September 2005, after an evening of drinking with friends, he was pulled over
while driving home for having an expired tag. He was arrested and charged with DUI
after failing a field sobriety test. Applicant claims he drank about three or four beers that
evening. In early 2006, the charge was dismissed, and Applicant was ordered to pay
court costs. In October 2010, Applicant had a few beers at a bar by himself over the
course of several hours. He fell asleep while driving home and ran off the road. Police
arrived, smelled alcohol on his breath and administered a field sobriety test, which
Applicant failed. Applicant was charged with DUI, but that charge was also later
dismissed with court costs assessed. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 26 - 27, 60 - 64)
Applicant is a recovering drug addict and alcoholic. In about October 2007, he
was at a party where he had consumed a few beers. A friend offered him a dose of
oxycontin, a prescription opiate-based painkiller. Applicant snorted a crushed up pill that
evening. He eventually became addicted to oxycontin to the point of illegal purchases
and use of at least one pill daily at times. In May 2009, when Applicant was about 25
years old, he started seeing a mental health professional for help with depression. As
part of his treatment, he was prescribed medication that blocks the intake of opiates and
related substances. Applicant did not use any illegal substances during the two years he
was being treated for depression. However, when that treatment and its medication was
discontinued in April 2011, he started using roxycontin, an equally addictive variation of
oxycontin. He continued to be addicted to and use this drug, usually by snorting it, until
June 2011. At that time, his family intervened and urged him to seek treatment, to which
Applicant was amenable. On June 5, 2011, he self-referred to an inpatient treatment
center. On June 21, 2011, he was discharged to an intensive outpatient program that he
successfully completed on July 11, 2011. In treatment, Applicant was diagnosed as
alcohol and opioid dependent with a history of depression. He was urged to attend 12-
step meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and Narcotics Anonymous (NA) as part of
an aftercare plan that was geared to complete and permanent abstinence from all mood
altering substances. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. F; Tr. 23 - 26, 28, 42 - 58)
Applicant readily characterizes himself as a drug addict and alcoholic. It has
been his goal since treatment to stay drug free and sober as a permanent way of life.
He has not used or otherwise been involved with any illegal drugs since June 2011. He
did not drink from about three weeks before entering inpatient treatment until May 20,
2012. Applicant went to a bar by himself and had a few beers. He decided to drive
home but was arrested at a gas station after being observed by a police officer. A DUI
charged was dismissed in January 2013. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 31 - 32, 66 - 67)
However, Applicant has not consumed alcohol since May 20, 2012, and now
understands that being alcohol dependent means he can never let his guard down or he
may suffer another relapse. Ironically, his parents testified credibly that they are more
 See Directive. 6.3.3
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
4
confident now after Applicant’s relapse that he has better insight into his alcohol
dependence, and that Applicant now is able to sustain his recovery. Applicant still
attends AA meetings at least weekly since his treatment, and he has a sponsor with
whom he communicates regularly. Applicant has also severed all ties to high school and
college friends, and others with whom he drank or used drugs in the past. He has a
close support system in his family, and he provided a notarized statement averring that,
should it be learned that he ever again uses alcohol or illegal drugs, he would not
appeal an automatic revocation of his security clearance. (Answer; Ax. D; Tr. 30 - 32,
59, 68 - 73, 86 - 99)
Applicant’s witnesses included two co-workers and two supervisors from work.
They have had daily contact with Applicant since December 2011. They unanimously
regard him as a valuable member of the military mission they all support. There have
not been any signs of substance abuse, his attendance record is impeccable, and his
work is generally regarded as superior. Applicant has a solid reputation in the workplace
for hard work, expertise, and reliability. His resume reflects a broad range of technical
expertise and four awards for excellent performance since 2006. (Ax. E; Tr. 109 - 127)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).6
5
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.6
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant abused prescription pain medications from 2007 until 2009, and for
three months in 2011. He illegally purchased those substances, sometimes daily, and
was addicted to them when he entered treatment in June 2011. At all times while
Applicant was involved with illegal drugs, he held a security clearance first granted him
in 2005. This information raises a security concern articulated at AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
6
More specifically, information about Applicant’s drug use requires application of
the following AG ¶ 25 disqualifying conditions:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment
program; and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
By contrast, Applicant’s last illegal involvement with drugs was in June 2011. At
the behest of his family, he promptly obtained and successfully completed inpatient and
outpatient treatment for his addiction. He has submitted a statement acknowledging
that, should he again illegally use drugs, his clearance would be automatically revoked.
Applicant has also severed all ties to persons with whom he used drugs and who
supplied them. Available information supports application of the following AG ¶ 26
mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
      (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;
      (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation; and
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
As to ¶ AG 26(d), the only information suggestive of a prognosis, either favorable
or unfavorable, consists of a 2011 treatment record that indicated Applicant was actively
engaged in his treatment and committed to a life without mood altering substances.
Also, there has been no subsequent drug use in more than two years. This, along with
7
the positive information about his changed lifestyle and his outstanding job performance
since he completed treatment, support at least partial application of this mitigating
factor.  On balance, available information shows the security concerns about Applicant’s
drug use are mitigated.
Alcohol Consumption
Applicant began using alcohol in about 2000. His use was, at times, abusive and
it escalated to the point of dependence in 2011. He has been arrested for DUI three
times. Even though all of the charges were dismissed, Applicant admits that alcohol is a
problem for him and that he must stay sober indefinitely. Applicant’s third DUI, in May
2012, constitutes a relapse after completion of inpatient and outpatient treatment in
2011. These facts raise a security concern about alcohol consumption that is expressed
at AG ¶ 21, as follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
22 disqualifying conditions:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence; and
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
Applicant’s consumption of alcohol continues to be a security concern because of
his 2012 relapse. However, Applicant has responded to that event in a way that reflects
well on his judgment and character. He has not consumed alcohol since May 20, 2012,
and he now has a better grasp on how difficult it can be to maintain his sobriety. His
circumstances have changed in that he has eliminated all ties to persons and
circumstances involved with his drinking. Those closest to him and who know him best
are more confident since his relapse than before that he will not drink again. Available
information supports application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual
8
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).
I have also concluded that some benefit inures to Applicant from the mitigating
condition at AG ¶ 23(d):
the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
As with application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(d) under Guideline H, there is
no prognosis in the record, favorable or otherwise. However, all other information
probative of this mitigating condition warrants partial application. Applicant has been
sober for at least 16 months, he has demonstrated through his participation in AA, his
notarized statement of intent regarding future alcohol use, and through the positive
changes in his personal and professional circumstances, that he is committed to living a
sober and productive lifestyle. On balance, the record evidence as a whole shows that
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about his alcohol dependence.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guidelines G and H. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of
the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 30 years old and presumed to
be a mature, responsible adult. He has been candid at all times about adverse
information in his background, and he recognizes that his ability to stay drug and
alcohol free require constant vigilance. His recovery started on his own volition after an
intervention by his family, who constitute a strong support network. His professional
work never suffered throughout his treatment, and he self-reported his relapse in 2012. I
am mindful of the fact that Applicant’s conduct occurred while he has had access to
classified information. Nonetheless, his response to those adverse circumstances was
mature and exhibited sound judgment, and he has established an excellent reputation in
the workplace for reliability and trustworthiness. A fair and commonsense assessment
of all available information shows that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns
about his drug use.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
9
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
