 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-12536 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 29, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On May 15, 2013, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 5, 2013. Applicant admitted 12 
allegations and denied 6 allegations in the SOR. Applicant requested his case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
On September 16, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s 
written case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant on September 18, 2013. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
September 24, 2013. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day 
time allowed that would have expired on October 24, 2013. I received the case 
assignment on November 7, 2013. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the six allegations in Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.k to 1.o, and 
admitted the other 12 allegations. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and works for a defense contractor. He is married and 
has two children. Applicant was unemployed from June 2009 to March 2011 after being 
laid off from work when his previous employer closed the plant. (Items 4-7) 
 
 Applicant has 18 delinquent debts totaling $47,513. He claims some of the debts 
resulted from his term of unemployment. Other debts were incurred by his wife who has 
promised to arrange payment. There is no proof she paid the debts. The medical debts 
he asserts were created when his twin sought medical care. His twin brother has almost 
the same first name as Applicant does. Applicant did not know these debts were on his 
credit report. He did not submit proof he attempted to collect money to pay the debts 
from his twin brother or otherwise dispute the medical debts. His delinquent debts date 
from 2008. The debts remain unresolved. (Items 4-9) 
 
 Applicant’s interrogatory answers on January 7, 2013, and his interview by the 
government investigator in August 2011 show promise of repayment action on his 
debts. However, his SOR Answer does not include any documents or other proof that 
he is paying his delinquent debts or has resolved them in some other manner. The two 
credit reports from July 2011 and November 2012 contained in the file show the 
accounts listed in the SOR as unpaid, charged off, but not paid in full or otherwise 
resolved. (Items 1, 4-9) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From at least 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated 18 delinquent debts, 
totaling $47,513 that remain unpaid or unresolved.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. In the past 12 years, Applicant 
has been unemployed 21 months after he lost his job in the private sector. He did not 
demonstrate by any evidence that the debts were caused or aggravated by that lack of 
work. He admits his wife incurred certain debts that she was supposed to pay and that 
his twin brother with nearly the same name caused some of the debts to be added to 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant’s credit report. But he does not show any of these debts were paid or that any 
of the other listed debts were resolved. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that 
issue. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not documented any action to resolve his delinquent debts. 
This inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based 
on the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and 
is obviously voluntary. His inaction will likely continue based on his past performance. 
Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a 
continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his 
delinquent debts during the past three years, at least, if not since 2008. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.r:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
