 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-13231 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances. However, 
doubts persist about his trustworthiness and reliability because he deliberately falsified 
a federal employment form and his security clearance application. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). On April 18, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR, 
waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the written record. 
 
 On August 28, 2013, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed 
findings of fact, argument, and twelve documentary exhibits. On October 15, 2013, 
Applicant responded to the FORM (Response) and submitted six exhibits. Government 
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 12 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) 1 – 6 are admitted into evidence 
without objection. On October 29, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 31, is married. He enlisted in the U.S. military in 2003 and after basic 
training was stationed overseas. He has continuously resided overseas since 2003. He 
completed his military service in March 2008 and received an honorable discharge. 
After leaving the military, Applicant was unemployed for about eight months. He has 
been continuously employed since December 2008. He was hired by his current 
employer in May 2011. (Gx. 5) 
 
 In October 2008, Applicant submitted a declaration for federal employment (2008 
DFE) to work for the U.S. military as a civilian employee. On his 2008 DFE, Applicant 
disclosed his military service. He also disclosed that he was delinquent on his federal 
student loan obligation and promised to bring the account current the following month. 
(Gx. 12) He was subsequently hired, but four months later resigned after being told that 
his job performance was unsatisfactory. (Gx. 5 at 16, Gx. 6 at 8)  
 
 In March 2009, Applicant submitted another declaration for federal employment 
(2009 DFE). He again disclosed his prior military service and that he left his previous 
federal job under unfavorable circumstances. (Gx. 11 at 2) In response to a question 
asking whether he had any delinquent federal debt, to include student loans, Applicant 
answered “NO.” (Gx. 11 at 1) A credit report from January 2009, reflects that Applicant’s 
federal student loans were in collection status and his private student loans were at 
least 120 days past due. All of the student loan accounts are reflected on this earliest 
credit report as individual accounts. (Gx. 10 at 3) 
 
 In June 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In 
response to questions asking whether he had any delinquent debts, to include accounts 
in collection status, Applicant answered “NO.” (Gx. 6 at 33) A credit report from July 
2011 revealed that Applicant had three accounts in collection status: (a) a $16,000 
student loan account; (b) a $6,000 consumer credit card; and (c) a $75 telephone bill. 
(Gx. 9 at 4 - 5)  
 
 In October 2011, Applicant was interviewed as part of his background 
investigation for his security clearance (background interview). He was asked about the 
three collection accounts appearing on his July 2011 credit report and his failure to list 
them on his SCA. Applicant told the investigator that he did not list the three collection 
accounts because they were over seven years old and, per the relevant SCA question, 
debts over seven years old did not need to be disclosed.1 He did not dispute the 
accuracy of the delinquent accounts listed on his credit report. When asked why he had 
not paid the accounts, Applicant “did not have any answer.” (Gx. 6 at 9)  
                                                          
1 The SCA question at issue asks, in pertinent part: “Section 26: Financial Record. For the 
following, answer for the last 7 years, unless otherwise specified in the question. Disclose all financial 
obligations, including those for which you are a cosignor or guarantor. . . . “f. Have you defaulted on any 
type of loan?; g. Have you had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?; h. Have you had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? . . . n. Are you 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (Gx. 5 at 32-33) 
 
3 
 
 
In about February 2013, Applicant was asked by DoD adjudicators about the 
status of the three collection accounts. Applicant stated that he had yet to resolve the 
student loan debt, but was in the process of working out a negotiated settlement with 
the creditor. As for the delinquent credit card account, he stated that the debt was being 
paid per an agreement with the creditor and submitted evidence that his monthly 
payments were being automatically debited from his bank account. He claimed to have 
successfully disputed the $75 telephone bill and submitted a credit report, which does 
not reflect the debt. (Gx. 6 at 2, 13) Applicant’s 2012 and 2013 credit reports also do not 
reflect the debt. (Gx. 7 – 8)  
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists the three collection accounts as unpaid debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
– 1.c) The SOR further alleges that Applicant falsified his 2009 DFE and 2011 SCA by 
failing to disclose his delinquent debts. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.b) 
 
 Applicant provided documentary proof of settling his student loan and credit card 
debts. He provided a copy of the settlement letter regarding the student loan debt, as 
well as proof of having paid the required $1,000 down payment and earlier payments 
towards satisfaction of the debt. He also submitted proof of having made monthly 
payments towards satisfaction of his credit card debt per his earlier agreement with the 
creditor. (Gx. 4; Ax. 1; Ax. 3; Ax. 5) He again claimed to have successfully disputed the 
$75 telephone bill, but submitted a document from the collection company noting that 
the debt had been validated by the original creditor. (Ax. 4) He claimed to have received 
financial counseling, but provided no evidence to substantiate this later claim. (Gx. 4 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his 2009 DFE and 2011 
SCA. He claims that he did not list his delinquent federal student loans on his 2009 
DFE, because he assumed his mother, who he states was a co-signor on the loan, was 
paying the debt. (Gx. 4) As for the 2011 SCA, Applicant continues to maintain that he 
not disclose the three collection accounts because they were more than seven years old 
at the time he filled out the SCA. (Gx. 4) Applicant’s earliest credit report reflects that his 
student loans were individual accounts.2 It also reflects that the three collection 
accounts were first reported as falling delinquent between 2007 and 2008, or three to 
four years before Applicant submitted his SCA. (Gx. 10 at 3 - 5)  
 
 In his Response, Applicant again claims that he did not falsify his 2009 DFE and 
2011 SCA. He maintains that he did not disclose his delinquent federal student loans on 
his 2009 DFE, because he assumed his mother was paying all his student loan 
obligations. (Response, ¶ 5) As for his failure to disclose the three collection accounts 
on his 2011 SCA, Applicant now claims that he did not understand the question on the 
SCA asking him to reveal past derogatory financial information. He also claims for the 
first time that he thought his grandfather was paying his delinquent credit card account. 
(Response, ¶ 6)  
 
                                                          
2 Contrast with credit card debt, which is reflected as a joint account and corroborates Applicant’s 
assertion that it was a joint account. (Gx. 9 at 4; Response, ¶ 6) 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises 
regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)).  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s failure to pay his debts, notably his 
student loan obligation, raises this concern and establishes the disqualifying conditions 
at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Applicant has started to resolve his long-standing financial problems by entering 
into agreements with the creditors for the two major debts alleged in the SOR and 
disputing the minor telephone bill. Although Applicant was dilatory in addressing his 
past-due debts, he submitted evidence of having addressed his major debts and 
established a recent track record of debt repayment as to these debts. The validity of 
the minor telephone bill remains uncertain as of the closed record. Although the 
collection company claims it has verified the debt with the original creditor, the debt, 
which is less than seven years old, was not listed on Applicant’s 2012 or 2013 credit 
reports. Accordingly, I find that Applicant mitigated the concerns arising from his past 
financial trouble and established the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under, and only the following warrants discussion: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 The security clearance process relies on the honesty of all applicants. It begins 
with the answers provided in the SCA and other relevant government forms. The 
obligation to tell the truth continues throughout the security clearance process. An 
applicant should disclose any derogatory information. However, the omission of 
material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant 
intentionally falsified their SCA or other relevant forms. An omission is not deliberate if 
the person genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or 
misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the information did not need to be 
reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.4 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his 2009 DFE and 2011 SCA, when he failed to 
disclose the relevant information regarding his delinquent debts. Applicant’s claim that 
he did not list his delinquent federal student loans because he thought they were being 
paid by his mother, who was purportedly a co-signor on the loans, is contradicted by the 
record evidence. Namely, Applicant’s credit reports reflect that his student loan 
accounts were all individual accounts. Furthermore, Applicant’s own words at the time 
contradict his assertions now that he was unaware his federal student loans were 
delinquent. Five months before submitting his 2009 DFE, Applicant admitted on a prior 
DFE that he was in arrears on his federal student loans. In light of this prior admission, 
Applicant’s claim now that he was unaware that his federal student loans were 
delinquent is not credible.  
 
 Applicant’s inconsistent and implausible claims that he did not intentionally falsify 
his 2011 SCA are also not credible. During his background interview, Applicant was 
initially confronted about his collection accounts and failure to disclose them on his 
SCA. He did not dispute the debts and did not provide an explanation for why he had 
failed to pay them. A reasonable person under similar circumstances would have told 
the investigator that the major debts at issue were being paid by his or her family – if 
such claim were actually true. Applicant’s silence when confronted by the investigator 
leads me to conclude that he was aware that the three debts at issue were in collection 
status and decided not to reveal the adverse information on his 2011 SCA. 
                                                          
4 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
7 
 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant’s explanation for failing to list his collection accounts on 
his 2011 SCA is contradicted by other record evidence. Notably, Applicant maintains 
that he did not list the three collection accounts because they were over seven years old 
when he filled out his SCA. However, the credit reports submitted with the FORM reveal 
that Applicant stopped paying on the three accounts between three to four years before 
he submitted his SCA. Accordingly, I find that Applicant was aware of his delinquent 
debts and deliberately failed to disclose them on his 2011 SCA.  
 
 Consequently, for the all reasons stated above, I find that AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
After reviewing all the applicable mitigating conditions and considering Applicant’s 
continued denial of responsibility, I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. I specifically considered Applicant’s military 
service and the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). However, Applicant’s history of 
dishonesty leaves me with serious doubts about his eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:              Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
