                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 11-13948
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 13, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(E-QIP) on March 11, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On July 23, 2013, the Department
of Defense (DoD) pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines E and H for
Applicant. The SOR set forth the reasons why DoD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 20, 2013, and he requested an
administrative hearing before an Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on September 23, 2013.  A notice of hearing was issued on September 24,
2013, and the hearing was scheduled for October 22, 2013.  At the hearing the
Government presented four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4,
which were admitted without objection.  Applicant presented one  exhibit, referred to as
Applicant’s Exhibit A, and testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until
close of business on November 1, 2013, to allow Applicant to submit additional
2
documentation.  Applicant submitted two Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B, which were admitted without objection.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on October 30, 2013.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 53 years old and married with two teenaged children.  He has a
Bachelor’s of Science Degree and a Masters Degree.  He is employed with a defense
contractor as an Senior Principal Engineer and is seeking to retain a security clearance
in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he has engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations.  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that Applicant
is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant has been working for the defense industry for almost thirty years.  (Tr.
p. 25.)  He completed his first security clearance application in 1986.  Following that, he
was granted a DoD security clearance in February 1999, in October 2002, and in
September 2006.  He was granted access to Sensitive Compartmented Information in
December 2007.  Over a twenty-four year period, from 1986 to 2010, he has
consistently denied any illegal drug use on his security clearance applications. He states
that at sometime in the 1986-87 time frame he told an investigator about his drug use,
but nevertheless he kept denying it on his security clearance applications.  (Tr. pp. 32-
34.)     
For example, Applicant completed a security clearance dated March 29, 2006.
Question 24(a) asked the Applicant since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever
is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana,
cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc),
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers etc.)
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc), or prescription drugs?  The Applicant answered, ‘NO.”
This was a false answer.  Applicant failed ot disclose his use of marijuana in about 2004
and 2005.
Question 24(b) for the same application asked the Applicant if he had ever
illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law enforcement officer,
3
prosecutor, or courtroom official; while in possession of a security clearance; or while in
a position directly and immediately affecting the public safety.  The Applicant answered,
‘NO.”  This was a false answer.  Applicant failed to disclose his use of marijuana after
he had been granted a DoD secret clearance in February 2009, September 2006, and
October 2002.  
Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  Applicant started using marijuana at the young age of 11 or 12 years old.
During high school he used marijuana a couple of times a week.  He also used LSD in
1983 while in high school.  After graduating from high school he attended college
where he continued to use marijuana, but he used it less frequently, possibly a couple
times a month.  It was in college that he also used cocaine in 1989 and 1990.      
Applicant was first granted a security clearance in February 1999.  At that time
he was using marijuana.  His security clearance was renewed in October 2002, and
again in September 2006.  He was also granted access to Sensitive Compartmented
information in December 2007.  Thus, over the past twenty-four years, while working in
the defense industry, and while holding a security clearance, Applicant estimates that
he has sporadically used marijuana about 250 times.  Applicant knew that his use of
marijuana was illegal and against DoD policy. He also knew that it was a violation of his
companies policies.  Applicant testified that he has used marijuana with friends at
social events and that most of his marijuana use was a carry over from his childhood.
He and his brother would use marijuana together on holiday celebrations.  He states
that he last used it in June 2010.  On this occasion he was on vacation with his brother
and family.  He explained that they were sitting around the campfire at night and his
brother offered him some marijuana.  At first, Applicant said no, but he later
succumbed.  (Tr. p. 40.)  
Applicant states that his wife is aware of the fact that he used marijuana in the
past, but his children do not know.  Applicant is ashamed and embarrassed for them to
find out.  He stated that he feels like a hypocrite having frank discussions with his
teenagers about not using illegal drugs when all along he has been using using illegal
drugs.  He feels that he has taken his situation for granted.    
Applicant testified that what led him to come clean about his marijuana use was
the fact that he underwent another security investigation.  During that investigation, he
disclosed his use of illegal drugs.  Applicant stated that it was about that time that he
had an epiphany, realizing that he was no longer a young kid but a 50 year old man
who was still using marijuana.  He thought to himself that it was pretty ridiculous.  (Tr.p.
51.)  Applicant submitted a letter of intent not to abuse any illegal drugs in the future or
be subject to automatic revocation of his security clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit A.)
    
As discussed above, Applicant used marijuana while holding a DoD security
clearance calls into question his maturity, his character, his judgment and his ability to
follow rules and regulations associated with having a security clearance.
4
A letter from the Applicant’s department manager indicates that following the
hearing, Applicant disclosed to him the issues under evaluation by the DoD.  His
manager was surprised and disappointed by Applicant’s mistakes as Applicant’s
behavior is not consistent with his perception of the Applicant.  Applicant is a well-
respected, highly ranked engineer, and one who the company has trusted to
consistently take responsibility to get the job done.  Applicant has performed
exceptionally on the job and is a valued member of the organization.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit B.) 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24.  The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
 None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
5
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
 None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
    b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”
The administrative judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
6
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order  adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of personal conduct and drug involvement
which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has been involved in dishonesty (Guideline E) and illegal drug use (Guideline H).  This
evidence indicates possible poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the
part of Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude
there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
      
The evidence shows that Applicant has been using marijuana over the past
twenty-four years while holding a DoD security clearance.  This illegal conduct is
inexcusable and shows a defect in character and poor judgment. This is not a one time
error in judgment, but has been a habit that has occurred continually and consistently
over the years.  As Applicant stated, he took his situation for granted.  He is 53 years
old but shows the maturity level of a young person.  He states that he has not used
marijuana since June 2010.  Although he has not used marijuana for almost three
years, given his past history, this conduct is likely to recur.  This past conduct casts
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and judgment.  Under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse; and 25.(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  This conduct is so egregious,
more time in abstinence is required to demonstrate that he can and will permanently
adopt a drug free lifestyle.
  
At this time, there is insufficient evidence of drug rehabilitation.  Considering all
of the evidence, Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case.
Accordingly, I find against Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
7
Furthermore, Applicant deliberately falsified a number of security clearance
applications over the years in order to conceal his illegal drug use from the
Government and obtain a DoD security clearance.  This conduct is also inexcusable.
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions 16.(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities applies.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly,
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) is found against the Applicant.
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case,
the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented, including Applicant’s favorable
performance evaluations, excellent work history and letter of recommendation.  Given
his long and hidden history of drug use, they fail to mitigate the negative effects his
personal conduct and drug involvement can have on his ability to safeguard classified
information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against Applicant.
8
Paragraph 2: Against Applicant.
        Subpara.  2.a.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.c.: Against Applicant.
        Subpara.  2.d.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.e.: Against Applicant.
                           Subpara.  2.f.: Against Applicant.
        Subpara.  2.g.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.h.: Against Applicant.
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
