KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge based her decision, in large measure, on the circumstances underlying
Applicant’s delinquent mortgage debts and the dilatory nature of her action in regard to those
debts.  Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-10813.a1.
DATE: 12/06/2013
DATE: December 6, 2013
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-10813
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 10, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
1The record also contains an earlier SOR, dated December 11, 2012, included as Government Exhibit (GE) 1.
This SOR is identical in content to the SOR subsequently issued on January 10, 2013.    
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).1  Applicant requested a hearing.
On September 10, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors; whether the Judge erred in her application of the mitigating conditions; and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is employed by a Government contractor.  She is seeking a security clearance for
the first time.  Her husband is a retired military officer who has worked for a Government contractor,
earning about $285,000.  He was laid off from his employment due to a reduction in force, after he
was diagnosed with a serious illness.  He is currently unemployed.
In 2001, Applicant and her husband bought a house for about $600,000, financing the
purchase with two mortgages.  Their monthly payments were $5,600.  In 2006, the couple found a
new home that they wished to buy, but they could not afford to pay mortgages on two properties.
They put their then-current house on the market, but it did not sell.  They bought and took
possession of the second property despite having failed to sell the first.  They paid a three-month
advance on the mortgages on their first house, after which they made no further payments.  The
lenders did not contact Applicant concerning the delinquencies owed on the first home, which was
eventually sold through a foreclosure action.  The SOR alleged delinquencies on both mortgages,
in the amounts of $25,818 and $15,586 respectively.
Although Applicant and her husband attempted to contact the lenders, they did not search
land records or inquire whether the house had been sold.  Later, during a clearance investigation of
his own, Applicant’s husband made a verbal inquiry about any debts they might owe.  Later, during
her own clearance interview, Applicant stated that she would contact one of the creditors and pay
any debt she owed, although she later acknowledged that she did not follow up on that promise by
writing to the creditor.  On July 9, 2013, after researching land records, Applicant wrote to the
creditors holding the two delinquent debts and requested information.  
Applicant and her husband have a combined net monthly income of $8,548, with expenses
totaling $7,936.  Applicant’s assets include real estate ($745,000); bank savings ($1,200); joint
savings ($2,424); and eight vehicles ($202,175).  Applicant’s husband sold two motorcycles and a
bike trailer for $8,000.  Applicant advised her clearance interviewer that she had not had financial
credit counseling.
The Judge’s Analysis
2The hearing was originally scheduled for July 1, 2013.  The Judge continued the hearing until July 8, 2013,
in order to ensure that the record contained the correct SOR and Applicant’s reply thereto.  Tr., Vol. 1, at 21.  After
reconvening on July 8 and taking evidence and testimony, the Judge continued the hearing a second time, because
Applicant had not received copies of the Government’s evidence prior to the hearing.  Tr., Vol. 2, at 105, et seq.  The
hearing reconvened on July 17, 2013.   
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial circumstances raised concerns under
Guideline F.  In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge cited to evidence that the
delinquent debts were, as of the close of the record, ongoing.  She also stated that Applicant’s
security-significant conduct occurred before her husband’s illness and job loss.  Applicant and her
husband undertook more mortgage debt that they could reasonably have afforded, which was a
circumstance within their control.  She noted that, while Applicant and her husband had made
intermittent queries to their creditors, they had not attempted to work out repayment plans.  She
noted that Applicant’s search of relevant land records, and submission of letters to her creditors,
occurred during a hiatus in her clearance hearing.2  The Judge characterized this activity as being
untimely, doing little to demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve debts.  In the whole-person
analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant had sufficient assets to establish and follow a payment plan.
Discussion
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings, for example that this was her first
application for a security clearance and that she had not had financial counseling.  We examine a
Judge’s findings to determine if they are supported by substantial record evidence, that is, “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See  ISCR Case No. 11-00970
at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).  The first of these two findings is drawn from Applicant’s answer to
Section 25 of her clearance application (GE 2), the second from her clearance interview, included
in GE 4, Answers to Interrogatories.  Even if the Judge’s findings contained errors, they did not
likely affect the outcome of the case.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are based
upon substantial record evidence.    
In challenging the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions, Applicant states the
following: “I still don’t understand what the court expects of an applicant when the creditor does not
respond back.  We have executed everything even that was asked and/or suggested by [the Judge]
and Government Attorney.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  We have examined the Judge’s questions and
comments during the course of the hearings, as well as those of Department Counsel.  The Judge
asked a number of questions in an attempt to clarify the evidence concerning Applicant’s efforts at
debt resolution.  We find nothing in the Judge’s questioning, or in the presentation made by
Department Counsel, that would lead a reasonable person to  believe that the submission of a certain
quantum of evidence would result in the granting of a clearance, to the extent that Applicant’s
comment might imply that she had such an expectation.  It goes without saying that a Judge cannot
promise a favorable clearance decision, especially when he or she has yet to review all of the
evidence that may be presented.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-06602 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2011).
Applicant’s comment might be interpreted as a challenge to the Judge’s impartiality, although again
we find nothing in the record that would persuade a reasonable person to believe that she was biased
against Applicant.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07395 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 14, 2010).  
We have examined Applicant’s challenge to the Judge’s application of the mitigating
conditions.  The Judge based her decision, in large measure, on the circumstances underlying
Applicant’s delinquent mortgage debts and the dilatory nature of her action in regard to those debts.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06975 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2012) (Even though the applicant’s debts
had been discharged through bankruptcy, the Judge properly considered the underlying
circumstances of those debts in evaluating the applicant’s security worthiness).  The Judge’s
comment about the recency of Applicant’s written communications with her creditors was consistent
with the record evidence.  Applicant asserts that she is financially stable and that the vast majority
of those debts listed in her credit report are not delinquent.  However, her argument consists
essentially of a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  Applicant has not
demonstrated that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-08063 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 19, 2013).  In support of her
appeal, Applicant has submitted evidence not contained in the record, which we cannot consider.
Directive  ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant has requested additional time in which to demonstrate that she has
mitigated the security concerns in her case.  However, we have no authority to grant such a request.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-00983 at 1-2 (App. Bd. May 17, 2011).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett         
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin           
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
