 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12626 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 30, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 11 delinquent debts totaling approximately $50,376 identified on 
the Statement of Reasons (SOR). Two of Applicant’s debts were duplicated on the 
SOR, which left Applicant with nine validated delinquent debts. He has resolved four of 
his delinquent debts, totaling $18,580. However, Applicant failed to produce sufficient 
evidence that five debts totaling $12,693 have been addressed or are otherwise 
satisfied. He has not fully mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on March 1, 2013 (Answer). In his 
Answer, Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 22, 
2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by 
Applicant on August 27, 2013. He was afforded 30 days to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not submit 
any information within the time. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He served on active duty in the Army from July 2001 to 
July 2005, and in the Reserves and then Army National Guard from September 2005 to 
June 2010. He has been working for his current employer since May 2008. He is 
married to his second wife. Applicant has an eight-year old child with his first wife and 
one step-son through marriage to his current wife. (Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 11 delinquent debts totaling approximately $50,376. Applicant’s debts appear 
in credit reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, 
and included explanations. (Answer; Items 7 through 11.)  
 
Applicant attributes his debts to his divorce in 2006 and his step-son’s illness in 
2009. His step-son had a mass on his brain that required surgery. (Item 6.) 
 
His debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on two delinquent medical accounts in the 
amount of $847 each (as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). Applicant indicated in his 
Answer that this was a single debt for an emergency room visit in 2009. Applicant 
indicated he spoke to the collection agency and they agreed to accept a payment of 
$218.75 as a settlement on this account. He presented a receipt that showed this debt 
was paid in full. This debt is satisfied. (Answer; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged off account in the amount of $761 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant claimed to have contacted this creditor and “they informed 
[him] that this is Charged Off and that [he] cannot pay money on this account any 
longer,” although he was willing to resolve the debt. He failed to offer any 
documentation to support his claim. This debt is unresolved. (Answer; Item 9; Item 10.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $13,778 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant indicated in his Answer that this debt was for a vehicle 
that belonged to his ex-wife. He presented an excerpt from a credit report that reflects 
this account is “paid satisfactorily.” The account number appears to match that listed on 
 
3 
 
the credit reports in the Government’s exhibits showing this delinquency. This debt is 
resolved. (Answer; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $10,000 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant indicated this debt was for a vehicle loan. He averred 
that he “contacted the collection agency and have set up a monthly payment of $100 
until this account is paid.” He submitted a copy of the agreement. However, Applicant 
failed to introduce proof he has made any payments in accordance with his agreement. 
Applicant’s credit report dated May 2, 2013, reflects that the balance on this debt is 
$10,277.  This debt is unresolved. (Answer; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $3,698 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f). Applicant indicated in his Answer that this debt, for a student 
loan, was paid. Applicant’s credit report dated May 2, 2013, reflects that this debt as 
“paid collection.” This debt is resolved. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $337 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g). Applicant attached a letter from this creditor to his answer indicating that 
this account was “settled in full.” This debt is resolved. (Answer.) 
  
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $18,176 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h). Applicant asserted in his Answer that this debt is a duplicate of 
the vehicle loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Both debts bear the same account number. This 
debt is resolved. (Answer; Item 7; Item 8; Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $955 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.i). Applicant claims, in his Answer that this debt is a duplicate of 1.c. 
However, these delinquencies bear different account numbers in Applicant’s credit 
reports. Further, he failed to produce documentation that this account is resolved. 
(Answer; Item 10.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $528 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.j). This debt has been past due since at least December 2010. In his 
Answer, Applicant indicated that this debt was resolved and he was awaiting 
documentation from this creditor. Applicant failed to present any documentation to 
support his claim. This debt is unresolved. (Answer; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent collections account in the amount of $449 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k). Applicant indicated this debt was paid. However, he failed to 
present documentation to support his claim. This debt is unresolved. (Answer; Item 6; 
Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant has not had any financial counseling. His personal financial statement 
reflects that he has $535 left over after he meets his monthly obligations. (Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
 
4 
 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted 
no character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems dating back to his divorce in 2006. 
His financial problems were exacerbated by his step-son’s illness in 2009. He became 
delinquent on a number of accounts during that time period as evidenced by the credit 
reports in evidence that established Applicant had nine individual delinquent debts.1 
While Applicant has resolved four of his alleged debts, without further documentation, I 
must find that he has an inability or unwillingness to resolve his five remaining 
delinquent accounts. He failed to document that he is addressing the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k., totaling $12,693. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
1
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, along with SOR ¶¶  1.d and 1.h.  were shown to be duplicated entries and should 
only be counted once, each. 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant has the burden to demonstrate that his delinquent debts are not a 
security concern. In this instance, he failed to document the status of four of his 
delinquent accounts. His behavior is frequent and on-going. Without further proof, 
Applicant failed to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable. 
 
 Applicant indicated that his financial problems were the result of a number of 
events, including his divorce and his step-son’s illness. These factors were beyond his 
control. However, he failed to show he acted responsibly in relation to his remaining 
debt. He failed to present any evidence that he is paying any of his remaining 
delinquent accounts or that they have otherwise been resolved. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial counseling. Further, there 
is little indication that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are being resolved or are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his remaining 
delinquent consumer debts. While he did resolve the majority of his delinquent 
accounts, his remaining debt is significant. He presented no evidence of any recent 
payments or progress toward the settlement of his remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
applicable. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that he was in the process of 
formally disputing any of his debts, and admitted to owing each of them. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant addressed four of his delinquencies, but $12,693 in delinquent debt 
remains unresolved. He failed to support his assertion that he is handling these 
remaining financial matters in a responsible manner. He claims to have resolved some 
of his outstanding accounts, and to have been in contact with the creditors to resolve 
others, but he presented no evidence to bolster his credibility on these statements. 
Without character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability, I cannot give his claims much weight. The potential for 
coercion, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Subparagraph 1.h:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
