 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10667 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 23, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 16, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 20, 2013. 
Scheduling the hearing was delayed due to the shutdown of the Federal Government. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
 
October 30, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 4, 2013. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, and he offered exhibits (AE) A and B, that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 12, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. He admitted the remaining allegations. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He graduated from high school in 1982. He served and 
retired from the Navy in 2003 in the pay grade E-6. Applicant has been married since 
2000 and has a son from the marriage. He was previously married twice to the same 
woman and has an adult son from the marriage. Applicant held a security clearance 
while in the Navy and in subsequent employments. He has worked for his present 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2010.1 
 
 Applicant stated that the security clearance application (SCA) was confusing to 
complete.2 
 
 In about January 2009, Applicant received a written warning from his employer, 
which stated his conduct and level of cooperation with coworkers were in direct conflict 
with the professional behavior expected of its employees. He was advised his actions 
included verbal confrontations with coworkers, perceived lack of team effort, disregard 
for the safety of those around him, and aggressive and volatile behavior displayed in the 
workplace, including throwing tools and yelling.3 
 
 In about March 2009, Applicant received a written warning from his employer for 
inappropriate and potentially offensive verbal comments, including sexual innuendo, 
made to coworkers at his place of employment.4  
 
 During Applicant’s July 5, 2011, interview with an authorized government 
investigator, when asked if in the past seven years he had any disciplinary actions taken 
against him, had any violations of policies, was involved in any misconduct in the 
workplace, if any allegations of misconduct were made against him, if he was verbally 
reprimanded, or was reprimanded in writing, Applicant answered “no.”5 
                                                          
1 Tr. 68-72. 
 
2 Tr. 23. 
 
3 Tr. 29-30. 
 
4 Tr. 30-31. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was confronted during the interview, by the government investigator, 
about the March 2009 written warning he received from his employer. He then admitted 
having difficulties at his place of employment during that time, but he did not feel he was 
involved in any sexual harassment. He acknowledged that after the employer’s 
investigation was conducted he was told by the employer’s investigator that he was 
guilty of sexual harassment. He stated he was given a letter which he signed indicating 
he would be terminated from employment in two weeks due to a loss of contract. He 
told the government investigator that the termination letter did not mention the sexual 
harassment offenses. At his hearing, Applicant continued to dispute that he committed 
sexual harassment. He believes now he was terminated under unfavorable conditions, 
but he was not informed of it at the time.6  
 
 During the same July 5, 2011, interview with the government investigator, 
Applicant was again asked if he had been disciplined, reprimanded, or counseled for his 
actions while working for his employer in 2009. He stated “no.” Applicant was then 
asked by the government investigator if he was involved in throwing tools. Applicant 
then recalled he was reprimanded in writing, which he signed, for throwing tools. 
Applicant stated he did not recall the incident until the investigator brought it up.7  
 
 Applicant was further questioned by the government investigator as to why he 
failed to disclose the abovementioned warning letters. He indicated that he was not sure 
the background investigator would check into these matters. He also indicated he was 
not trying to hide anything. He stated at his hearing: “I still honestly did not know that the 
government was looking for that information from me, ma’am.” When questioned why 
he answered “no” to the specific inquiries made by the investigator about whether he 
had any disciplinary actions, he again indicated he was not trying to hide anything. He 
then admitted he willfully concealed the information because he was embarrassed. On 
November 5, 2012, Applicant signed the summary of the government investigator’s 
interview with him and wrote, “I agree that all the information above is complete and 
accurate.”8 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant indicated that he is confident he was terminated by the 
above subject employer, but does not agree he was guilty of sexual harassment. He 
stated he did not know why he was removed from the contract. He believed if he could 
have found another contract he could have remained with the employer. He stated he 
was never told his termination was adverse. He stated he was the person who initially 
reported sexual harassment in the workplace against another employee. He stated it 
was not until he was interviewed by the government investigator that he learned he was 
terminated.9 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 Tr. 26-31, 48; GE 2. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 50-62. 
 
4 
 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant confirmed he received a written warning from his 
employer because he threw a tool. Applicant stated that he did not intentionally fail to 
disclose the warning letters he received. He stated he was not sure what information the 
security clearance application (SCA) was requesting. He also stated that he knew he 
had written warnings, and he did not disclose them because he did not believe he was 
guilty. He admitted he intentionally did not disclose the information. He stated when he 
was confronted by the government investigator he was more concerned about issues 
with coworkers and their handing of classified material, so he did not answer correctly. 
He felt his coworkers were retaliating against him because he reported problems with 
the handling of classified material. He stated he cannot explain his actions, and they do 
not reflect who he is.10 
 
 Section 22 of the SCA completed by Applicant on February 7, 2011, asked if he 
had ever been charged with any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. Applicant 
answered “no.” Applicant was arrested in 1991 or 1992 for driving while under the 
influence of alcohol. During Applicant’s background investigation interview on July 5, 
2011, he failed to disclose this arrest until after he was confronted by the government 
investigator with the information. Applicant indicated that he did not list the offense 
because it was discussed in his prior background investigations. At his hearing, he 
stated he forgot to disclose the information on his SCA. He stated he had previously 
included it on other SCA he completed, and he had no intention of concealing the 
information.11  
 
 Applicant was diagnosed with an alcohol problem in 1995. He completed a 12-
step program. He was advised to abstain from alcohol consumption. He continues to 
drink in moderation and has not had any further reported incidences. He believed the 
diagnosis was skewed by his command at the time. In a sworn statement made to the 
Naval Criminal Investigative Service on January 18, 2005, Applicant stated with regards 
to his past alcohol problems that, “I was a black out drunk for the entire period of the 
first marriage.” He went on to state, “After the treatment for alcoholism, I feel that I have 
learned how to lead a healthy and responsible life.”12 
 
 While serving in the Navy, Applicant went to nonjudicial punishment three times 
and was demoted. He has attended anger management classes.13  
 
 Applicant provided character letters. He is described as extremely 
knowledgeable and helpful in his area of expertise; completes the job with confidence; 
does not shy away from obstacles; has an outstanding work ethic; is enthusiastic; has 
impressive communication skills and a professional demeanor. He is reliable, dedicated, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Tr. 50-62, 73. 
 
11 Tr. 20, 34, 64-67; GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. 38-46; GE 3. 
 
13 Tr. 46-48. 
 
5 
 
 
organized, diligent, trustworthy, loyal, and hardworking. He can work with minimal 
supervision. He, works well with others, and has an unwavering commitment to the 
customer. While working with classified material, Applicant followed policies and 
instructions.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
14 AE A; Answer to SOR. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following potentially apply:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not 
limited to consideration of:. . . (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate 
behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
and 
 
(e) personal conduct, concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant received written warnings from his employer concerning sexual 
harassment and his inappropriate conduct in the workplace. Applicant intentionally and 
deliberately failed to voluntarily disclose these written warnings during his background 
interview with a government investigator. When questioned by the government 
investigator, Applicant deliberately lied when he answered “no” about whether he had 
any written or verbal reprimands from his employer. Applicant also deliberately failed to 
disclose to the investigator that he had been arrested in 1991 or 1992 for driving under 
the influence of alcohol. He has established a pattern of dishonesty. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant received two written warnings about his behavior in the workplace. He 
was specifically asked by the government investigator if he had received any 
disciplinary actions, reprimands, written or verbal warnings. He stated “no.” Applicant 
may have disagreed with the findings of his employer’s investigation, but he had a duty 
to disclose he received the warnings. He intentionally did not disclose he received the 
warnings. He disputed the sexual harassment finding, but did not dispute he threw a 
tool in the workplace. After the government investigator confronted Applicant, he then 
admitted that he received the warnings. He finally admitted he did not disclose them 
because he was embarrassed. Applicant also failed to disclose his DUI arrest. Although 
 
8 
 
 
he may have disclosed this information in previous SCAs or investigations, he still was 
required to do so when completing his most recent SCA. I did not find Applicant’s 
explanations credible because when he was afforded an opportunity to disclose the DUI 
that was not listed in his SCA to the government investigator, he failed to do so. 
Applicant did not make his disclosures until he was confronted with the facts by the 
government investigator. I did not find his testimony credible. His offenses are not 
minor. Applicant has established a pattern of dishonesty that is not mitigated. None of 
the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He retired honorably from the Navy, and he provided 
character letters that describe him as a well thought of employee. Although he appears 
to have done well in some work assignments, Applicant has had difficulties in others. 
There is sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant was given written warnings regarding 
his conduct. The concern is that when asked to disclose any warnings he may have 
received, Applicant lied about them. It is his actions in concealing the warnings and not 
disclosing them until he was confronted by the government investigator that is the 
serious security concern. Self-reporting one’s conduct is the corner stone of the 
investigative process and the expectation when entrusted with handling classified 
information. Applicant repeatedly failed to self-report information that he was specifically 
asked about. It is not within his purview to decide what information to provide, especially 
when it is specifically requested, because he may have disclosed it in the past. 
 
9 
 
 
Although, Applicant appears to be well thought of by some as evidenced in the 
character letters he provided, his failure to be honest during the investigative process is 
a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the personal 
conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
