 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 12-00465   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated 39 delinquent debts totaling $23,000. At this time all 
SOR-listed debts remain unpaid or unresolved. He failed to demonstrate that he is 
reliable in addressing his financial delinquencies. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 23, 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On June 18, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted an undated answer to the SOR requesting that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 4.) He 
submitted a subsequent dated answer on July 16, 2013. (Item 7.) A complete copy of 
the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 11 Items, was mailed to Applicant that 
same day, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on September 20. 2013, and returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). He did not provide additional information in response to the FORM 
within the 30-day period. I received the case assignment on November 21, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his responses to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 39 allegations, pertaining to 
delinquent debts, contained in the SOR. (Items 4, 7.) 
 
 Applicant is a 27 years old. He attended technical training and community 
college. He lives with his girlfriend and their three young children, ages 7, 5, and 2. 
From April 2004 to June 2011, he worked full-time except from June 2009 to April 2010 
when he was unemployed. In June 2011 he was hired as a pipefitter for a defense 
contractor. In August 2011 Applicant submitted his first SF-86. (Item 5.) 
 
  In October 2011 a security investigator interviewed Applicant about his 
background and delinquent debts listed on a credit bureau report (CBR). During that 
interview, he discussed many accounts, but did not recognize several debts. He told the 
investigator that he intended to research those debts for which he had no knowledge. 
He understood the importance of resolving his credit problems. He attributed the 
delinquent debts to a lack of medical insurance, a significant decrease in his income 
over the years, a period of unemployment, and irresponsible financial choices. (Item 9.) 
 
 According to CBRs, dated September 2011 and March 2013, Applicant’s 
delinquent debts began accumulating in 2006 and continued into 2013. Based on those 
CBRs, the SOR alleged 39 delinquent debts totaling $23,000. They include unpaid 
judgments, defaulted credit card debts, utility bills, returned checks, and 23 unpaid 
medical bills. Some medical bills are listed with small amounts owed: ¶ 1.y for $13; ¶ 1.z 
for $20; ¶ 1.aa for $29; ¶ 1.bb for $19; ¶ 1.cc for $30; ¶ 1.dd for $ 63; and, ¶ 1.ee for 
$99. At some time prior to the March 2013 CBR, Applicant disputed certain accounts. 
The outcome of those disputes is unknown. (Items 10, 11.) According to his July 2013 
Answer, Applicant asserted that he paid a debt owed to a state’s unemployment 
commission (¶ 1.q for $600) and is paying a credit card debt (¶ 1.o for $5,084), but did 
not provide evidence to confirm those payments. All debts remain unresolved. 
 
 Applicant provided a copy of his April 2013 budget. His net monthly income is 
$2,384. His monthly expenses and payments on debts total $4,087. (Item 9.) The 
 
 
3 
 
 
budget does not appear to be complete or accurate. He indicated that he has taken an 
on-line credit counseling course, but did not submit documentation to verify its 
completion or substance.   
  
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted 
no character references describing his judgment, morality, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person 
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Since 2006 Applicant has been accumulating delinquent debts that he has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2006 and remain unresolved. 
He failed to demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to continue or recur, calling 
into question his reliability and trustworthiness. The evidence does not support the 
application of AG ¶ 20(a). 
  
 Applicant provided some evidence that his financial problems arose because he 
experienced financial problems related to a period of unemployment and a decrease in 
his salary. Those were circumstances beyond his control. However, he also honestly 
acknowledged that some debts were the result of irresponsible financial choices, which 
were circumstances within his control. He did not provide evidence that he attempted to 
responsibly address the delinquent debts as they were accumulating, a factor that must 
be considered in establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Thus, this mitigating 
condition has no application.  
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence that he participated in credit or 
financial counseling. He acknowledged that 37 of the 39 SOR-listed delinquent debts, 
totaling over $23,000, remain unresolved. He provided no proof to document his 
assertions regarding the resolution of the other two debts. Hence, AG ¶ 20(c) has no 
application, as there are not clear indications that his financial problems are under 
control. Applicant did not provide evidence that he made a good-faith effort to resolve 
any debts, as required under AG ¶ 20(d). There is no evidence in the record that 
Applicant successfully disputed any delinquent debt owed by him. AG ¶ 20(e) has no 
application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 27-year-old 
man, who began working for a defense contractor in June 2011. In October 2011 he 
discussed his delinquent accounts with a security investigator. He indicated that he 
would research the debts that were unknown to him. He acknowledged the importance 
of maintaining a good credit rating. In July 2013 Applicant admitted that 37 of the 39 
SOR-listed debts remained unresolved. After receiving the FORM in September 2013 
he was given an opportunity to submit more information pertinent to his delinquent 
debts, including the two that he asserted were paid or being resolved, in response to the 
Department’s arguments regarding their unresolved status. He failed to do so, further 
raising questions about his personal finances, reliability, maturity, and judgment.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.mm:   Against Applicant   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
