 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03531 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jerry Fugit, Esq. and Andre D’Souza, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2013, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 28, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
on October 3, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted his response to the 
FORM on November 14, 2013 (Response). The case was assigned to me on November 
22, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
H. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He is married and has no children. He has a Ph.D. in 
mathematics. Since October 2010, he has worked for a defense contractor. He has no 
military service and has not previously held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: using and purchasing 
marijuana on numerous occasions from 1999 through May 2011; using hashish about 
five times from about 1999 to about 2004; and using and purchasing hallucinogenic 
mushrooms three times from about 2000 to about 2008 (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d). 
  
 Applicant first began using marijuana as an undergraduate college student and 
continued through his graduate and post-graduate collegiate years. Initially, he used 
marijuana about twice a week, sporadically, but over time that use gradually decreased. 
During the timeframe from 2008 to 2011, when he moved to his current location, he 
reduced his use to about one to two times per month. His last use was in May 2011. 
Using marijuana was mostly a social event for him and was prevalent in the academic-
based lifestyle he was living from 1999 through 2008. At times he would purchase about 
a quarter ounce of marijuana at the cost of about $75. He purchased marijuana for his 
own use, and he would share it with his friends.2  
 
 In addition to marijuana, Applicant used hashish about five times when he was 
an undergraduate from 1999 to 2004. He used it with friends at social functions, but 
because of its harsh taste, he stopped using it. He also experimented with 
hallucinogenic mushrooms on about three occasions between about 2000 and 2008. He 
used it with friends on two occasions and with his girlfriend (now wife) one time. The last 
use was while on a backpacking vacation in 2008.3 
 
 Applicant decided to stop using all drugs prior to applying for his present position. 
His cessation is corroborated by his wife’s sworn affidavit. Many circumstances in his 
life have changed and using drugs was not compatible with those changes. He no 
                                                          
1 Items 2-3. 
 
2 Items 2, 4; Response. 
 
3 Items 2, 4; Response. 
 
 
3 
 
 
longer was in the drug-permissive academic environment, he is now married, is a home 
owner, and has disassociated from those who use drugs. His wife stopped using drugs 
when they were married in 2012. His current focus is on maintaining a successful career 
and someday raising a family.4  
 
 Applicant admitted the full extent of his drug use in his initial security clearance 
application (SF 86) and he also described in detail his drug use to a DOD investigator. 
He also offered into evidence hair analysis and urinalysis drug screening tests that 
showed negative results for five drugs including THC (the metabolite found in 
marijuana). The tests were reported on November 5, 2013. Applicant also submitted a 
written statement of intent not to use any illegal drugs in the future.5  
 
 Applicant offered a character letter from his current supervisor attesting to his 
good character for trustworthiness. This supervisor, who has held a security clearance 
for more than 20 years, recommends him for a clearance. His work appraisal also 
reflects that he is a positive contributor to his employer.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
                                                          
4 Items 2, 4; Response. 
 
5 Items 2-4; Response. 
 
6 Response. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including … purchase …. 
 
 Appellant used and possessed marijuana on a number of occasions. He also 
used hashish on five occasions and used and purchased hallucinogenic mushrooms on 
three occasions. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Although Applicant’s marijuana purchasing and use was frequent, his use of 
hashish and illegal mushrooms was infrequent. However, he has abstained from all 
drug use for over two years. That abstinence is partially corroborated by the drug test 
offered into evidence and his wife’s affidavit. Given his age and the circumstances of his 
use (permissive drug-use lifestyle associated with academia), such use happened 
under circumstances unlikely to recur. His change of lifestyle (getting married, buying a 
house, obtaining a job with a defense contractor, moving away from his college 
location), the negative drug tests, and the positive recommendation from his current 
supervisor all support the conclusion that his past use does not affect his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. The period of 
abstinence is sufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the future. 
Additionally, he has disassociated from most of his drug-using friends and submitted a 
sworn statement of intent not to use any drugs in the future with automatic revocation of 
clearance for non-compliance. AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the Applicant’s 
supportive character evidence and his negative drug tests. I also considered Applicant’s 
statement of intent not to use drugs in the future. I also weighed that he used marijuana 
on numerous occasions, his age at the time of such use, and the surrounding 
circumstances. He also demonstrated a commitment toward non-use of any drugs in the 
future. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
