 
1 
 
 
                                                               
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02696 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) described one delinquent mortgage 
account for $167,872 that went into foreclosure. He failed to provide sufficient 
documentation of progress resolving this debt. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On July 16, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On August 15, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated October 22, 2013, was provided to him on October 30, 2013.1 Applicant e-mailed 
Department Counsel on November 19, 2013, that he did not have any response to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a; however, he denied SOR ¶ 1, 
which quotes the concern in AG ¶ 18. (Item 3) He also provided a mitigating statement. 
He did not provide any corroborating documentation from creditors as part of his SOR 
response. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old, and he has been employed as a senior mechanical 
engineer since 1991. He married in 1988, and he was divorced in 1995. In 2002, he 
married, and he has two children, who were born in 1989 and 1992, and three step- 
children, who were born in 1971, 1978, and 1979. He never served in the military. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1979. There is no evidence of criminal arrests, 
convictions, use of illegal drugs, or alcohol abuse.  
 
In 2007, Applicant separated from his spouse.3 In October 2007, he purchased 
property PH for $170,000, and his spouse remained in property CR. In August 2008, his 
daughter began attending college; she did not qualify for need-based financial 
assistance; and Applicant and his spouse each chose to pay half of her college tuition 
and expenses, which amounted to about $10,000 to $12,000 per year for Applicant’s 
share. Applicant’s mortgage payment for property PH was $20,400 per year. Applicant 
stopped making his mortgage payments in October 2008, and property PH was 
foreclosed in October 2009. Applicant said he stopped making payments on his 
mortgage because he could not afford to pay his share of his daughter’s tuition and still 
make the mortgage payments on property PH. In November 2009, Applicant and his 
spouse “reunited and resumed [their] marriage,” and now they both reside in property 
CR. After about three months of not paying his mortgage, Applicant asked the creditor 
                                            
1The FORM is dated October 21, 2013. The DOHA transmittal letter is dated October 22, 2013, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated October 30, 2013. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s February 27, 2009 SF 
86 and/or his October 7, 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI) 
are the sources for the facts in the Statement of Facts. (Items 4, 5) 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph is 
Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 3)  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to renegotiate the mortgage; however, the creditor wanted him to bring the mortgage to 
current status. Applicant was unable to bring the mortgage to current status. Applicant 
said he disclosed the foreclosure to his security manager in August 2009; however, his 
JPAS incident history indicates he disclosed the foreclosure on June 7, 2010. (Item 6)  
 
Applicant provided a November 2009 court order from a lawsuit involving Fannie 
Mae, also known as Federal National Mortgage Association, stating that the case was 
called for trial and “neither party to the cause of action appeared to answer the 
summons of the court.” The Court dismissed the case “for want of prosecution.”   
 
When Applicant completed his February 21, 2009 SF 86, he stated that he did 
not have any debts currently over 90 days delinquent. He did not disclose any 
derogatory financial information. Applicant told the an Office of Personnel Management 
investigator during his personal subject interview (PSI) he did not disclose his 
delinquent mortgage because his mortgage had not yet gone into default or foreclosure 
status when he completed his SF 86. (OPM PSI at 6, Item 5)  
 
Applicant said he received a letter from the creditor in October 2009 stating the 
mortgage company “had forgiven” him for the debt. Id. at 2. He said he still had 
possession of the letter. Id. He had no further contact with the creditor after October 
2009. Id. In October 2009, Applicant was approximately 12 months or $22,878 behind 
on his mortgage. Id. Applicant has not received financial counseling. Id. at 3. He did not 
provide a copy of the letter from his mortgage creditor that he referenced in his OPM 
PSI. 
 
Applicant and his spouse’s monthly financial information is as follows: gross 
income is $13,429; net income is $10,600; monthly expenses are $3,025; and net 
remainder is $7,574. Id. Applicant had $90,000 in his 401k account, and his spouse had 
$180,000 in her 401k account. Id.      
 
Applicant said he is a reliable, trustworthy, loyal, ethical, law-abiding, and 
responsible U.S. citizen.4 He is a sincere believer in freedom and security. Although he 
has had some financial difficulties, he would never jeopardize national security. 
   
Applicant’s credit reports, OPM PSI, responses to DOHA interrogatories, and 
SOR response all establish an unresolved debt of approximately $170,000. Applicant’s 
FORM repeatedly emphasized the absence of mitigating information and explained that 
the lack of evidence showing Applicant acted reasonably and responsibly “before, 
during, or after [the] financial hardship” occurred. (FORM at 3) The FORM suggested 
that Applicant investigate whether the foreclosure might not result in a debt because of 
“a State Anti-Deficiency law.” (FORM at 3) Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the 
FORM in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. (FORM at 3-4) No additional 
information was submitted in response to the FORM.             
 
                                            
4The source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 3)  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, OPM PSI, responses to DOHA interrogatories, and SOR response. 
Applicant’s file documents one delinquent foreclosed mortgage debt of about $170,000 
that became delinquent in January 2009. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to his SOR debt; however, he provided some 
mitigating information. Applicant’s separation from his spouse and establishment of a 
separate household and the necessity of funding his daughter’s college education are 
financial conditions largely beyond his control; however, he did not act responsibly 
under the circumstances. He did not describe any unemployment or changes in his 
income in the last six years. He did not establish that he could not have done more to 
pay his creditors and provide documentation of such efforts to DOHA.   
 
In the state where property PH is located a deficiency judgment is a possibility: 
 
[A] lender [may] obtain a deficiency judgment against the borrower [if] the 
property is sold at the foreclosure sale for less than the amount of the 
outstanding indebtedness. The amount of deficiency that can be sought is 
the difference of the amount of the outstanding indebtedness (including 
allowable fees and expenses related to the sale) minus either the fair 
market value of the property at the time of the foreclosure sale or the sales 
price of the property at the foreclosure sale. Unless a party requests a 
determination of fair market value at the time of the sale and provides 
competent evidence of the value, the court defaults to using the sales 
price for its calculation. 
 
Katherine A. Tapley, New Law Complicates Foreclosure Sales in Texas, 41 St. Mary's 
L. J. 525, 537 (2010) (footnotes omitted). There is no evidence of the sale price at the 
foreclosure. There is no evidence that a deficiency judgment has been issued against 
Applicant, and it is well beyond the two years in which such as suit must be brought.6 
Thus, Applicant may not owe anything to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant, however, 
has not provided any documentation showing the status of the debt. A more 
fundamental problem of Applicant is that he provided evidence that he had ample 
financial resources to pay his mortgage using his net monthly remainder of $7,574 or 
even to withdraw the funds from his 401k account. He did not show whether his 
daughter could have borrowed some of her tuition from student loan companies or why 
it was necessary for him to default on his mortgage for property PH.   
 
In sum, Applicant did not provide any documentation, such as checking account 
statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or 
made any payments to the mortgage creditor for the year prior to his foreclosure. There 
is no financial documentation relating to this SOR creditor as follows: financial 
counseling; maintenance of contact with the SOR creditor;7 correspondence to or from 
                                            
6See Tex. Prop. Code § 51.003(a) (“any action brought to recover the deficiency must be brought 
within two years of the foreclosure sale” in a nonjudicial foreclosure); Tex. Prop. Code § 51.004(b) (a suit 
to collect a deficiency in a judicial forfeiture case “must be brought not later than the 90th day after the 
date of the foreclosure sale”). Tex. Prop. Code §§ 51.0001-51.015 is available at 
http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/PR/htm/PR.51.htm. 
  
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the SOR creditor; a credible debt dispute in light of his acceptance of responsibility in 
his SOR response; attempts to negotiate payment plans; or other evidence of progress 
or resolution of this SOR debt. There is insufficient evidence that his financial problems 
are being resolved, are under control, and will not occur in the future.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant’s 
finances were adversely affected when he became separated from his spouse, and his 
daughter had unexpected college expenses. These are financial conditions largely 
beyond his control. He has an ample monthly net monthly remainder of $7,574 and 
accumulated a substantial 401K account balance. He admitted responsibility for his 
mortgage debt. He has been employed by the same defense contractor since 1991, and 
for the last 22 years he had stable employment. There is no evidence of criminal 
conduct, abuse of alcohol or drugs, or other delinquent debts. He contributes to his 
company and the Department of Defense. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he 
would intentionally violate national security.   
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. He fell behind on 
his mortgage in 2009. His PFS showed a net monthly remainder of $7,574, and he did 
                                                                                                                                            
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
not describe any payments after 2009 to his mortgage creditor. He could have made 
greater progress resolving and documenting resolution of his delinquent SOR debts. He 
did not provide documentary proof that he attempted to settle this delinquent debt and 
described no contact with the creditor after 2009. His failure to establish his financial 
responsibility shows lack of judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See 
AG ¶ 19. More documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security 
concerns. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
