1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 
 )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-03470
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Charles C. Maddox, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging security concerns arising under J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct). The SOR was dated August 22, 2013. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2013. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on October 22, 2013, scheduling the hearing for November 19,
2013. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-2 were admitted into evidence, without objection.
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-F, which were admitted without objection.  I received the transcript (Tr.)
on November 26, 2013. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the sole factual allegation under
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and  Guideline E (Personal Conduct) with explanation. 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor who works as an
accountant. She received a bachelor’s degree in 1987. In 1985, Applicant obtained her
professional license as a certified public accountant (CPA). She is married and has
three children. Applicant has worked for her current employer since October 2011.
However, she worked as an auditor in public service for more than 25 years.  She has
held a security clearance since 1989. (GX 1)
  
Criminal Conduct
On March 18, 2011, Applicant pled guilty to two counts: count 2 making false
statements and aiding and abetting, and count 3, a fraud in the second degree She was
sentenced to 12 months of probation, a $1,000 fine, and 100 hours of community
service. (GX 2) In August 2012, she completed her probation.
As a result of the conviction, Applicant surrendered her CPA license and in 2009,
she resigned her position of employment. Her security clearance was revoked.
Personal Conduct
In 2008, Applicant worked for a government entity as an auditor in a supervisory
capacity. She advised a friend that she would need to be a resident of the city to apply
for an administrative position in her agency. Applicant’s friend applied for and obtained
the position. The friend used an address, other than her own, to claim residency
preference. Applicant created a fake rental lease so that her friend could prove
residency. (GX 2) Applicant admitted that she influenced her friend to use the city
address. (Tr. 97)
At the same time, Applicant, who was the treasurer, for a professional
association, had access to a bank account that was intended for the association.
Applicant created an account in the name of the association. The account address was
her own. The account was used to launder funds in an attempt to show that her friend
was paying rent in the city and had an income. The account was used to pay personal
bills and make loans to her friend. Applicant put her own money into the account, and
her friend wrote rent checks, but Applicant withdrew funds from the account and gave
them to her friend. Applicant also put her own money into the account for her
daughter’s college fund. As part of her plea, Applicant admitted that she improperly
used money from the association while she served as treasurer. An investigation
revealed that none of the money in the account was from the association. (AX C)
In January 2009, Applicant resigned from her position. An investigation revealed
that Applicant’s friend did not live in the city and was not entitled to invoke the residency
3
preference. The investigation led to questions about Applicant’s behavior and actions
connected with her friend. 
In 2010, an investigation about Applicant and her role in the above situation was
completed. She worked cooperatively with the U.S. Attorney’s office. Upon advice of
counsel, she pled guilty to two misdemeanor offenses in connection with her knowledge
and involvement in the false statement and fraudulent scheme.
Applicant submitted letters of recommendation from friends and former
colleagues who recommend her for a security clearance. (AX A-F) Each attests to her
excellent skills and ability to perform her job functions. She is described as honest with
a hard working ethic. Applicant is also described as a solid citizen who works diligently.
(AX E) A former supervisor noted that Applicant is an exceptionally good worker and
talented auditor. She was one of the most effective employees in the organization. (AX
D)
Applicant’s spiritual mentor describes Applicant as a good person who loves to
help others. She completed her community service, but also volunteers in the
community. She likes to use her time and talent to benefit others less fortunate than
she. (AX F) Applicant has completed training in professional ethics. 
A former colleague of Applicant testified that she is an extremely hard worker.
According to the witness, Applicant had a tremendous energy level and out-performed
most of her colleagues. (Tr. 18) He knew her from 2001 until 2010. The witness had no
hesitation in recommending Applicant for a clearance. (Tr. 20)
Applicant’s current supervisor testified that he hired Applicant for her current
position. During the hiring interview, Applicant disclosed her March 2011 conviction.
Applicant’s supervisor described her as an exemplary worker who is dependable and
reliable. 
Applicant expressed remorse about her activity in 2008, and she accepted
responsibility for her unethical actions.  She believes this was an isolated incident that
occurred under unique circumstances. She believes she made an impulsive decision
which showed an uncharacteristic lack of judgment. (Tr. 69)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
5
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable
conditions;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program.
As discussed, in March 2011, Applicant pled guilty to one count of making false
statements, and aiding and abetting, and one count of fraud in the second degree. She
completed her twelve month probation, and community service. She paid $1,000 in
fines. Disqualifying condition AG  31(a)  applies. 
AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns under this
guideline:
AG ¶ 32 (a) states, that “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” Applicant has no other criminal conduct or record and an exemplary
employment history. The actual behavior occurred about five years ago. It is an isolated
incident in a long career of service. Applicant pled guilty in March 2011. She has
completed her probation. Applicant completed her community service and paid a fine.
She was motivated by a desire, albeit misplaced, to help a friend. This condition
partially applies.
After reviewing the mitigating conditions, I find that AG ¶ 31(d) (there is evidence
of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse, or restitution, job training or higher education,
good employment record, or constructive community involvement) partially applies.
6
Applicant’s former and current employers praise her work ethic and good work.
She is remorseful and has a spiritual mentor to help guide her life choices. She
completed more than 40 hours of continuing professional education training in ethics. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
7
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
As discussed above, Applicant engaged in improper behavior in 2008. She
advised a friend to use an incorrect address to gain a residency preference for a job.
She also used a bank account in the name of a professional association for her own
purposes and to facilitate her friend’s fraud. She did not disclose this information until a
later investigation. AG ¶¶ 16(b), 16(d), 16(e), and 16(g)  apply. Her conduct shows
poor judgment.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
8
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant did not disclose her role in the false statement and fraudulent scheme
until she was investigated in 2010. She cooperated with authorities at that point. She
did not deny her role in the plan, and she pled guilty to charges in 2011. She
acknowledged unethical and criminal conduct.  However, the offenses are not minor.
She completed probation in 2012. I have some doubts about her judgment,
trustworthiness, and reliability.  After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in
AG ¶ 17, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concern under personal
conduct. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
9
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 49-year-old professional who works as an auditor. She has held a
security clearance for many years. She has good references from her employers.
Applicant has worked in public service for more than 25 years. She is married and has
three children. However, she devised a complicated, fraudulent plan to aid a friend to
obtain a position in her agency. Applicant intentionally advised the friend to use an
incorrect address to obtain a residency preference. She also created a fake lease to
establish the residency. As treasurer of a professional organization, she used an
account to launder money for her friend. Applicant put her own funds into the account
and used her home address. She rationalized this behavior as helping a friend. 
Applicant did not disclose this plan until she was investigated and questioned, in
2010. Upon advice of counsel, she pled guilty. She admits that she was wrong and that
she falsified documents. She also used the association account as she had access to
it. She was not authorized to write checks to herself. 
Applicant’s conviction in 2011 is an isolated event in a 25 year work history. She
admits that she used poor judgment. The criminal behavior is not mitigated by the
circumstances in the case. The behavior occurred in 2007. Her conviction was in 2011.
She completed her probation in 2012 and completed community service. It is too soon
to find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under criminal conduct. 
As to her personal and criminal conduct, I do not find that Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns at this time. I have doubts about her reliability, good
judgment, and trustworthiness. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the
Government. Applicant has not met her burden in this case. She has not mitigated the
security concerns under the criminal conduct and personal conduct guidelines.
Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
10
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
