                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
            ----------------------------------                 )        ISCR Case No.  12-06780           
                                                                      )                                
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On August 15, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary
affirmative determination of eligibility for a security clearance, and  recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether a security  clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs)
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 9, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another judge on May 15, 2013, reassigned to me on August
27, 2013, and scheduled for hearing on September 25, 2013. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5). Applicant relied on one witness
(himself) and 25 exhibits (AEs A-CC). The transcript (Tr.) was received on October  3,
2013. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payments on his
inherited property and to his debt consolidation group.  For good cause shown, Applicant
was granted seven days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded two
days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with partially illegible
correspondence from his debt consolidation group covering four of Applicant’s listed
creditors and excerpts from a February 2013 credit report reflecting nine negative
accounts and two positive accounts. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs DD
and EE. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 24 delinquent medical and
consumer debts exceeding $55,000. Allegedly, he failed to file state income tax returns
for tax years 2008 through 2011, failed to file federal income tax returns for tax years
2005 and 2009, and failed to pay property taxes on inherited property. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations. He denied
the allegations covered in subparagraphs 1.c ($6,455), 1.o ($570),  1.t ($155), and 1.x
($11,227). He claimed he returned the vehicle to the car’s seller identified in
subparagraph 1.c and understood there would be no amount owing from the return. He
claimed he does not know anything about the creditor identified in subparagraph 1.o and
satisfied the debt covered in subparagraph 1.t. 
Applicant also claimed in his response that the deficiency associated with a trade-
in he completed in 2006 (creditor 1.x) was based on a misunderstanding and will be
satisfied out of settlement arrangements initiated by the law group he has employed.  For
those debts he admitted, he claimed he will complete settlement arrangements with the
same law firm he employed.
              
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 59-year-old desktop support technician of a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
3
Background
Applicant married his first wife in November 1972 and divorced her in April 1980.
(GE 1) He has one daughter and one stepdaughter from this marriage (ages 32 and 42,
respectively).  Applicant married his second wife in September 1992 and has no children
from this marriage. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 84-85) He earned an associate’s degree in
computer and electronic engineering in June 1997 and received work-related technical
training between March 1983 and March 1984, and again between September 1989 and
May 1990. (GE 1)  
Applicant enlisted in the Army in March 1983 and served six months of active duty
and nine years of reserve duty. (GE 2 and AE CC) He received his honorable discharge
in September 1992 and served four years of Army Reserve duty between September
1991 and January 1995. (GE 2 and AE CC) While on active duty in support of Operation
Desert Storm in 1991, Applicant earned numerous decorations, including a Bronze Star
Medal, an Army Commendation Medal, an Army Achievement Medal, a National Defense
Service Medal, and an Army Reserve Components Achievement Medal. (AE CC) 
Applicant’s finances
Between 2002 and 2012, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts
during recurrent periods of unemployment and underemployment. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 64-
70, 81-83, 89-90) Altogether, he accrued 24 delinquent debts exceeding $55,000. (GEs
2-5) They are listed in his credit reports and include a judgment covering unpaid rent that
was entered in December 2008 in the amount of $9,308 (creditor 1.a); a repossession
deficiency in the amount of $6,455 (creditor 1.c); a student loan of $1,872 (creditor 1.s);
and a car purchase deficiency in the amount of $11,227 (creditor 1.x). 
With insufficient funds to cover his estimated state taxes for tax years 2008
through 2011, he failed to file state tax returns for these years.  Funding deficiencies also
contributed to his failures to file his federal income tax returns for the tax years of 2005
and 2009. And since July 2010, he became obligated to make $291 monthly property tax
payments in connection with his assessed delinquent taxes ($10,222) on his inherited
land covered by subparagraph 1.aa. (AEs Z and  AA; Tr. 73-74, 99)
Since returning to full-time employment over 17 months ago, Applicant has
addressed several of his debts through payment plans, first with a legal group (A Group),
and more recently (in February 2013) with a debt repayment group (B Group). (AE A; Tr.
66, 89-90)  With the A group, he made no documented payment progress, but did obtain
the removal of several debts from his credit report. (AE DD; Tr. 76-80) Debts removed
from his credit reports include the following: creditor 1.b ($11,021); creditor 1.c ($6,455);
creditor 1.i ($898); creditor 1.l ($67); creditor 1.o ($570), creditor 1.t ($155); and creditor
1.x ($11,227). (GEs 3-5 and AE DD)  Whether these debts were removed based on
successfully mounted disputes over their legitimacy, or due to age, is unclear. (AE EE; Tr.
77) Neither of these two groups provided any formal financial counseling.  (Tr. 70, 86-88) 
4
In May 2013, Applicant completed an installment agreement with the IRS to satisfy
a $13,015 federal tax debt covering tax years 2004-2006, 2008-2010, and 2012. (GE 2
and AE Y; Tr. 72-73) Under the terms of his agreement, Applicant obligated himself to
make monthly payments of $172. (AE Y) Previously (in September 2010), he completed
an installment agreement with the IRS to cover tax liabilities totaling $6,451 for the tax
years of 2004, and 2006-2007 with agreed monthly payments of $181. (GE 2 and AEs Y
and Z; Tr. 71-74) Unable to meet the monthly payments called for in his 2010 installment
agreement, he submitted to periodic $45 monthly payments through check garnishment
to the IRS over a six month period spanning July 2011 and November 2011. (GE 2 and
AE Y) IRS payment records document the receipt of $588 under the 2010 installment
agreement. (AE Z; Tr. 74-75) It is unclear how many additional payments Applicant made
to the IRS under his 2013 installment agreement.
Addressing his remaining debts, Applicant scheduled four listed creditors for
repayment in his repayment agreement with B Group: creditor 1.x ($11,602), creditor 1.r
($1,252), creditor 1.i ($898), and creditor 1.o ($570). He documented one up-front
payment of $244 to the B Group, but no follow-up payments. (AE A; Tr. 95)  Further, he
has since applied for and obtained a property tax loan to satisfy the back taxes owing on
this property. (AE AA; Tr. 93-94) Under the loan’s terms, Applicant is making loan
payments of $291 a month. (AE AA; Tr. 94) However, he has not provided any
documentation of the number of loan payments he has made to date. 
Applicant’s furnished evidence does not reveal much headway with the balance of
his creditors covered in the SOR. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 75-82) Except for some documented
payments on one of his education loans (creditor 1.t), these debts have either been
charged off, placed in collection, or reduced to judgment. (GEs 3-5; Tr. 78) Most of these
creditors owning these debts have not been contacted by Applicant and have not been
pursued by the creditors. (Tr. 77-80) Some are presumably barred by his state’s statute of
limitations. (GEs 3-5 and AE EE; Tr. 77-80) Creditor 1.s (holder of one of the defaulted
student loans made to Applicant) has continued to monitor Applicant’s loan without any
apparent payment success. (GE 2)
In a 2012 personal financial statement, Applicant reported net monthly income of
$2,592 a month. (GE 2; Tr. 91) He reported monthly personal expenses of $2,100 and
over $700 in monthly debt payments, leaving a deficit remainder of over $300 a month
(GE 2)  He estimates his monthly expenses have since increased by almost $500 a
month, and he has no savings. (GE 2; Tr. 93) Applicant has a very modest repayment
history with the IRS, his debt consolidation groups, and his remaining creditors, and no
realistic means of meeting his payment obligations on his proven debts. 
Endorsements
Managers, supervisors, and coworkers who have worked with Applicant value his
technical and communications skills and his integrity and recommend him for a position of
trust. (AE BB) Applicant provided no performance evaluations or proof of community and
civic contributions.
5
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
6
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. (AG, ¶ 18)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts and
financial instability, marked by medical, consumer, and tax debts, an adverse judgment,
and state and federal tax filing deficiencies. Since accruing these delinquent debts,
Applicant has been able to remove several of the debts from his credit reports. Also, he
has completed repayment arrangements with two firms and the IRS. Still, he has no
compiled track record or demonstrated means of paying his remaining debts in a
sustained manner. Moreover, he has failed to document any filings of back state and
federal tax returns cited in the SOR.
7
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts; his incurring an adverse judgment
and failing to file state and federal tax returns; and his past inability to address most of
his identified debts and tax returns raise potential security concerns about his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness in managing his finances. His actions warrant the
application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations;” and DC ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also implicit in
financial cases.
While potentially extenuating, Applicant’s identified periods of unemployment and
underemployment were not fully developed and are not accompanied by timely
repayment initiatives after returning to gainful employment. As a result, only partial
application of MC  ¶  20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” has some application to Applicant’s
situation. 
Full mitigation is also lacking in Applicant’s payment initiatives to date. While an
applicant need not have paid every debt alleged in the SOR, the applicant needs to
establish that there is a credible and realistic plan to resolve identified financial
problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR Case
No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant’s completed debt repayment plans
are not accompanied by any sustainable payment history and do not afford him any
realistic opportunity to pay or settle his listed debts with the resources he has available
to him.
While Applicant has satisfactorily resolved several of the listed debts through
payment initiatives and removal from his credit reports, most of his debts remain either
unresolved or inadequately addressed. Still unresolved, too, are the adverse judgment
entered against him, his multiple tax debts with state, federal, and local  authorities and
his state and federal tax filing deficiencies. Applicant’s efforts do merit partial application
of MC  ¶  20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.” But for lack of any evidence of formal counseling or clear
indications of resolution of the raised financial issues, he may not take any advantage of
MC  ¶  20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.”
8
In the past, Applicant has relied on charge-offs, passage of time, and modest
enforcement action by his creditors. Statutes of limitation, while considered important
policy tools for discouraging plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality
in litigation, have never been equated with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors.
See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004)(quoting ISCR Case No.
99-9020, at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 2001). Nonetheless, they provide effective collection
barriers and, like bankruptcy, serve to insulate the debtor from pressures to raise cash
to satisfy his or her creditors.
To be sure, many of Applicant’s larger debts are aged (dating to 2006 and
before) and are likely barred by statues of limitation in his state. Still, they remain
unsatisfied for the most part. So, too, Applicant has failed to provide any documentation
of his filing state and federal tax returns for the years in question or mounting payment
efforts on the debts not covered by his consolidated payment plans. Minimal mitigation
initiatives necessary to meet Appeal Board requirements are not demonstrated in
Applicant’s case. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence reflects some unfortunate
economic circumstances played a role in Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts.
Less clear is how his economic circumstances prevented him from better addressing his
medical, consumer, and tax debts, and his other accrued legal obligations once he
returned to full-time employment. He still owes in excess of $35,000 on his remaining
debts, and has failed to document any progress in filing back state and federal tax
returns for the noted years.  
While Applicant has made some modest headway in addressing several of his
listed consumer debts, and has successfully completed repayment agreements with
debt consolidation firms, the IRS, and the local firm administering his property taxes, he
still retains outstanding delinquent debts without any convincing evidence of a sustained
payment history or realistic means of repaying the creditors covered by his agreements.
Important, too, Applicant has not documented any formal financial counseling or shown
any progress in filing back state and federal tax returns.
To his credit, Applicant has made some good-faith efforts to address his creditors
and has a commendable service record. Neither his service record nor his
endorsements from managers, supervisors, and co-workers are enough, though, to
overcome security concerns over the state of his finances.  Applicant’s efforts to date
are insufficient to facilitate safe predictable judgments about his finances.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):    AGAINST APPLICANT
9
   Subparas. 1.a, 1.d-1.h, 1.j-1.n 1.p-1.s, 1.u-1.w,
       and 1.y-1.aa:                                            Against Applicant
                                                                                                          
Subparas. 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, 1.o, 1.t, and 1.x:                     For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
