                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-00114
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ronald P. Ackerman, Attorney At Law
December 12, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on September 11, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On May 21,
2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on July 12, 2013, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned Administrative Judge on August 20, 2013.  A notice of hearing was issued
on September 9, 2013, scheduling the hearing for October 29, 2013.  The Government
presented nine exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 9, which were
admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented nine exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, which were also admitted without objection.  The
Applicant also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of
business on November 8, 2013, to allow the Applicant to submit additional
2
documentation. The Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, consisting of twenty-
eight pages, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was admitted
without objection.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on November 8, 2013.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 50 years old, and divorced with four children.  He has a
bachelor’s degree.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Deputy Program
Manager/Program Manager and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection
with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted allegations 1(b), 1(c), 1(d), 1(f), 1(g), 1(k), as set forth in
the SOR.  He denies allegations 1(a), 1(e), 1(h), 1(i), and 1(j).  Credit Reports of the
Applicant dated April 18, 2005; September 17, 2011; February 19, 2013; April 30, 2013;
and October 28, 2013, reflect that the Applicant is indebted to each of the eleven
creditors set forth in the SOR, in an amount totaling at least $185,000.  (Government
Exhibits 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.)  Applicant has worked for the defense industry for almost
30 years and has held a security clearance since June 1984.    
Applicant’s first marriage was from February 1994 to February 2004.  He has one
adult son from the marriage, and complied with the court order to pay spousal and child
support, which he completed.  In March 2005 he met his new wife and they were
married in July 2007.  She had a son from a previous marriage who was born with a
deformed esophagus.  He is now the Applicant’s stepson.  She and the Applicant had
two biological children of their own, a 6 year old girl and a 4 year old boy.  In February
2007, they purchased their dream house that cost 1.6 million dollars.  At that point,
Applicant’s finances were extended and tight but he felt he and his wife could handle
the bills.  In 2008 his wife got pregnant with a high risk pregnancy and had to stop
working.  This reduced their income about $35,000.  
In 2008, a series of other circumstances contributed to his financial problems.
Applicant’s stepson became ill. This required his wife to stay at home to care for him
instead of work.  Applicant described a serious medical emergency that occurred in
2008, when his stepson choked on a hot dog.  This incident resulted in costly medical
care and surgeries.  Applicant’s insurance covered about 80% of the bill of about
3
$750,000.  Applicant paid $50,000 out of pocket, and had to hire a nurse to help care for
his stepson.  Applicant could no longer afford his lifestyle and he started falling behind
on his mortgage payments.  Applicant applied for a loan modification but that was
unsuccessful, only to find out one day that his house had been put up for auction.  In
July 2009 Applicant filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in hopes of preventing the sale of
his home.  1.(k))  (Government Exhibit 3.)  Applicant was ordered by the court to pay the
first on the house and whatever he could afford on the second until a payment plan to
his creditors was arrived at.  In order to get out of the bankruptcy, as he thought it
looked bad to the Defense Department, his attorney advised him to short sale the
house, which he did in September 2010.  Applicant believes he lost $400,000 from the
short sale of the house.  
In March 2011 Applicant’s wife filed for a legal separation.  In April the court
ordered Applicant to pay spousal and child support in the amount of $5,200 monthly,
which also includes his wife’s attorney fees.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  Applicant’s wife
obtained a restraining order against him, and he was required to pay for where she and
the children were living while he moved into a hotel.  This was costly.  Applicant is also
currently paying the Internal Revenue Service for back taxes owed for 2007 in the
amount of about $20,000.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)  Applicant has not had any
discretionary monies available to pay his delinquent debts.  
After getting back together and then separating again, Applicant eventually filed
for divorce in January 2013.  But before doing so, in 2012, when they were together,
and as his financial indebtedness was mounting, Applicant purchased a pre-owned top
of the line BMW for his wife with a monthly payment of $906 for a total of $46,000.  (Tr.
P. 102.)  In April 2013, Applicant was ordered to pay child support and attorney fees for
his wife’s attorney.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  Applicant is presently in the midst of a
family law matter scheduled for trial in December 2013 and is uncertain as to what his
final legal obligation will be.  
Applicant has paid one delinquent debt owed to a creditor listed in 1(h) of the
SOR in the amount of $233.  (Tr. pp. 73-74 and Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  Another
delinquent debt owed to a creditor for a consolidation loan listed in 1(j) of the SOR in the
amount of $22,204 was settled and resolved by the law firm that is assisting him with his
debts.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  
The following delinquent debts set forth in the SOR remain owing and delinquent;
1.(a) The Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of $4,637.  Applicant does not
know how he incurred this debt or what it is for.  1.(b) The Applicant is indebted to a
creditor in the amount of $27,664 for a vehicle (a Land Rover) that was voluntarily
repossessed.  1.(c) The Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of $17,127 for
a personal line of credit.  1.(d) The Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of
amount of $15,419 for a personal line of credit.  1.(e) The Applicant is indebted to a
creditor in the amount of $13,578 for a baby grand piano that was repossessed.  1.(f)
The Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of $34,710 for a vehicle (a
Porsche) that was voluntarily repossessed.  1.(g) The Applicant is indebted to a creditor
4
in the amount of $50,930 for a motor boat that he purchased.  Applicant has paid this
debt.  (Tr. pp. 73-74 and Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  1.(i) The Applicant is indebted to a
creditor in the amount of amount of $831.  Applicant believes this is a delinquent
medical bill.    
Applicant currently earns $230,000 annually.  (Tr.p. 87.)  His personal financial
statement dated July 13, 2013, indicates that after paying his regular monthly expenses
he has $98.00 left at the end of the month.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.)  His intention is to
work with his creditors and clean up his credit report.  About a year ago he hired a law
firm to assist him in resolving his debts.  (Tr. p. 76.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
5
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
6
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  The evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that circumstances largely beyond his control started his
financial problems.  Namely, Applicant’s stepson’s medical issues that resulted in
$50,000 in out of pocket expenses and his wife’s high risk pregnancy; and his
separation and eventual divorce and the related expenses.  His decision to purchase his
dream home further tightened his financial situation.  Despite the fact that he is currently
paying legal obligations, the Applicant’s future legal obligations are uncertain, and he
has not been able to pay his delinquent debts or otherwise resolve the debts that are of
concern to the Government in this case  Applicant has only paid two of his delinquent
debts.  The rest remain owing.                                
The Applicant has not done enough to show that he is fiscally responsible.
Although he seems to understand the importance of paying his bills on time, he simply
has not been able to do so.  At this time, there is insufficient evidence of financial
rehabilitation.  The Applicant has not demonstrated that he can properly handle his
financial affairs or that he is fiscally responsible. 
Under the particular circumstances of this case, the Applicant has not met his
burden of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  Thus, it cannot be said that
he has made a good-faith effort to resolve his past-due indebtedness.  He has not
shown that he is or has been reasonably, responsibly or prudently addressing his
financial situation.  Assuming that he continues to work to resolve his debts, and then
shows that he has not acquired any new debt that he is unable to pay, he may be
eligible for a security clearance in the future.  However, not at this time.  Considering all
of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  Mitigating Condition 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances applies, but is not
7
controlling.  In this case, Applicant’s finances are stretched and he has not been able to
pay his delinquent debts, which remain outstanding.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not
overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.h.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j.: For the Applicant
    Subpara.  1.k.: Against the Applicant.
8
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
