 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02704 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The judgment, two charged-off 
accounts, and two collection accounts listed in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), total 
approximately $170,000. The debts remain unaddressed. The financial considerations 
security concerns remain. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 5, 2013, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
On July 25, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), dated September 10, 2013. The FORM contained eight attachments. On 
September 23, 2013, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on October 23, 2013. As of November 4, 2013, no response had 
been received. On November 6, 2013, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied one debt (SOR 1.e, $115,000) and 
admitted the remaining judgment, two charged-off accounts, and one collection account. 
I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old commmunication security custodian who has worked 
for a defense contractor since May 2010. In December 2006, while in the U.S. Navy, he 
held a top secret clearance with sensitive compartmented information (SCI) access. He 
was on active duty with the U.S. Navy from July 1984 through July 2008, at which time 
he was honorably retired. Following retirement, he was unemployed for one month, 
worked eight months for an employment agency, and five months for a cable company. 
In November 2009, he worked as a government civilian employee and in May 2010 
obtained his current job. His current salary is approximately $55,000 and his annual 
military retirement is approximately $29,000. The record contains no information about 
Applicant’s duty or work performance.  
 
 Applicant purchased two homes over a number of years. One went to foreclosure 
and he is current on payments on the other. In October 2001, he purchased a home for 
$172,000. (Item 5) In 2003, he refinanced the loan, which increased his debt to 
$217,000. In 2005, he also obtained a $30,000 home equity loan on the property. In 
April 2005, he purchased a new home, left his former residence, and obtained two 
tenants to cover the mortgage payments on his former residence. (Item 5) A few months 
after obtaining the tenants, one left and the rental payments received from the other 
were unsufficient to cover the entire mortgage payments. Applicant made up the 
difference. In 2007, Applicant realized he could no longer make up the difference on the 
rental property and also make his mortgage payments on his new residence. (Item 5)  
 
 In August 2007, Applicant was to deploy to an overseas location with the Navy. 
He attempted to sell the property, but needed $325,000 to cover the two loans on the 
house. (Item 5) The real estate market had declined and he was unable to sell the 
home. He attempted a short sale on the property, but the banks holding the mortgages 
were unwilling to allow a short sale. In March 2008, Applicant returned from his 
 
3 
deployment to discover the mortgages on his rental property had been sold. He failed to 
make the mortgage payments. In December 2009, the house went to auction and no 
purchaser was found.  
 
 In 2005, Applicant purchased his current residence for $555,000 with a $444,000 
first mortgage and a $111,000 second mortgage. (Item 5) He asserts he was current on 
the home until his August 2007 deployment. The house had an adjustable rate 
mortgage (ARM). In June 2007 and December 2007, the ARM rate increased and 
Applicant fell further behind on payments. In 2007, while deployed to the Middle East, 
he worked out a three-month loan modification with the creditor (SOR 1.e) to address 
the past-due payments. (Item 4) The plan was to make sufficient payments so that a 
loan modification could be made on the loan.  
 
In January 2010, the first mortgage ($444,000) was sold to another bank. 
Applicant’s loan modification request began anew. In 2011, the new bank approved the 
loan modification. (Item 4) The modifications list the new loan balance of $542,076, 
which included $101,758 in past-due interest and expenses. The interest rate was 
reduced from 6.75% to 2.5% and the lender agreed to forego $54,000 of deferred 
principal each year for three years if he remained in good standing on the loan. (Item 5) 
He is current on this note. 
 
The FORM contains three credit bureau reports (CBR) dated: November 1, 2011 
(Item 6), January 22, 2013 (Item 7), and March 20, 2013 (Item 8). Each CBR shows the 
$444,000 first mortgage being transferred to Applicant’s current mortgage holder. All 
three CBRs indicate the second mortgage ($111,000) remains in collection status and 
was not transferred or sold to Applicant’s current mortgage company. 
 
 Applicant listed the SOR debts on his October 27, 2011 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In March 2013, he also 
acknowledged owing the debts when he completed written financial interrogatories. 
(Item 5) 
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Judgment. $9,992 Unpaid. Account turned over for collection in August 
2007. As of July 2013, he was awaiting the collection 
firm to assign payment options. 
b Charged-
off credit 
card 
account. 
 
 
$13,599 
 
Unpaid. Applicant asked the creditor to reduce the 
debt, which the creditor initially refused to do. (Item 5) 
In July 2013, he asserted the creditor agreed to accept 
$9,609 and he was establishing a repayment plan. 
(SOR Answer) No documentation was presented 
showing a plan or payments.  
 
4 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
c Charged-
off account 
for a home 
equity loan. 
 
 
 
$31,045 
 
Unpaid. Applicant stated he took no action because the 
property was foreclosed upon by the bank. (Item 4) In 
September 2012, he said he had received an offer of 
settlement from the creditor offering to settle this debt 
for $3,222. (Item 5) In July 2013, he said the creditor 
agreed to settle for 10 to 30 percent of the debt and he 
expected to receive the offer amount in July 2013. No 
documentation was received showing an offer or 
payment on the offer. 
d Cell phone 
collection 
account. 
 
 
$312 Unpaid. Applicant provided no documentation showing 
this debt was paid. He states this was his stepson’s 
account, which went into default while he was 
deployed. He asserts it was incorrectly reported in his 
name. In 2011, he stated he would contact his stepson 
to resolve the matter. (Item 4) In September 2012, he 
stated he was attempting to resolve this debt with the 
creditor. (Item 5) In his SOR answer he said the debt 
was no longer owed, but provided no documents 
supporting this assertion. 
e Second 
mortgage 
collection 
account. 
$115,000 Unpaid. All three CBRs (Items 6, 7, and 8) list this as a 
collection account and do not indicate that it was 
transferred to Applicant’s current mortgage company. 
The CRBs do show the first mortgage ($444,000) was 
so transferred.  
  $169,948 Total debt listed in SOR 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
6 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. The judgment, two charged-off 
accounts, and two collection accounts total approximately $170,000. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant does not fully meet any the mitigating factors for financial 
considerations. His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He produced 
limited evidence of circumstances beyond his control, and he has not acted responsibly 
in addressing his debts. He has received no credit or financial counseling, nor has he 
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to 
bring them under control.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by the 
downturn in the real estate market. His first home, which he converted into rental 
 
7 
property, went to foreclosure. More than $300,000 in the first and second mortgages 
were addressed by the foreclosure. However, he still owes $31,000 for a home equity 
loan (SOR 1.c) on the property. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced a downturn in the real estate market, 
but experienced only one month of unemployment following his 2008 retirement from 
the Navy. The majority of the debt on his first property caused by the decline in real 
estate prices has been forgiven. The home equity loan remains. AG & 20(b) does not 
apply. 
 
Applicant asserted he intends to pay the judgment (SOR 1.a) and the two 
charged-off accounts (SOR 1.b and c). He has made no payments and there is no 
evidence he has received financial counseling or that his financial problems are being 
resolved. He has yet to address the five debts. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) do not apply. 
 
Applicant has disputed the cell phone debt (SOR 1.d) and the second mortgage 
on his current residence (SOR 1.e). For AG & 20(e) to apply he must not only have a 
reasonable basis to dispute the debt, but must also provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute, which he has not done. 
 
Applicant asserts the $115,000 second mortgage on his property has been 
modified into his current mortgage note. He cites the CBRs as proof thereof. The CBRs 
indicate the first mortgage ($444,000) was indeed transferred to the holder of his current 
mortgage, but the CRBs also indicate the second mortgage remains in collection status. 
He has provided no documentation showing both mortgages were included in the 
modification.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
 
8 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case.  
 
 There is some evidence favorable to Applicant. From July 1984 through July 
2008, he served on active duty with the U.S. Navy retiring honorably. While in the Navy, 
he was called on to deploy to overseas locations in support of his country. When he 
completed his October 2011 e-QIP, he listed all of his delinquent accounts. He has 
remained in contact with some of his creditors and is still attempting to reach settlement 
offers on his delinquent accounts.  
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Even though the annual household income is approximately $84,000 and he states he 
would like to pay his past-due delinquent debts, he has made no payments on them. He 
has had no recent contact with the holder of his second mortgage. His failure to repay 
his creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits 
which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
In not requesting a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. 
However, in so doing he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on 
only a brief explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
In choosing to have this matter handled without a hearing, I am unable to 
evaluate Applicant’s demeanor, appearance, or credibility. From the record, I am unable 
to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest in his statement that he intended to pay 
all of his delinquent debts. Even if I found he intends to pay his delinquent debts, there 
is no evidence of payment on his debts.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all of Applicant’s debts have been paid – they 
have not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to 
hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. In the future, if Applicant has paid the judgments and delinquent accounts, 
established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his 
 
9 
delinquent obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
