KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had a kengthy history of not
meeting financial obligations.  He noted that despite some progress, Applicant still had a
significant amount of overdue indebtedness, including tax delinquencies.  The Judge could
reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  Adverse Decision
affirmed
CASENO: 12-03238.a1
DATE: 12/06/2013
DATE: December 6, 2013
In Re:
---------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-03238
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
6, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
1The SOR contained a single allegation under Guideline E, which the Judge concluded favorably to Applicant.
That favorable conclusion is not at issue on appeal.
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 26, 2013, after the hearing, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision.1 
The Judge found: Applicant is 49 years old.  She has had custody of her three children since
her first divorce.  Her first husband rarely pays child support.  In 2002, Applicant and her second
husband bought a business.  Her second husband managed the finances and used Applicant’s name
and social security number in connection with the business after the couple separated in 2004.  He
did not pay all the debts and taxes owed from the business.  Applicant continued to work in the
business until 2008, when it failed.  
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2007.  The total amount of debt listed was in
excess of one million dollars.  Her debts were discharged in 2007.  After closing the business, her
employment was sporadic, with an extended period of unemployment in 2008 and 2009.  A number
of debts became delinquent.  The SOR alleges 54 delinquent debts, unpaid judgments, and state tax
liens.  The total of the state tax liens is about $25,227.  Credit reports list a significant amount of tax
liens as being released.  An accounting firm is helping Applicant resolve the tax liens.  Applicant
established that a few of her non-tax debts have been paid, and that she is paying on a few other
debts.  In December 2012, Applicant entered into an installment agreement with the IRS to pay $150
per month to resolve a tax debt of $2,611 for tax year 2011.  Applicant also owes the IRS about
$2,200 for tax year 2012.
Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of her bankruptcy.  She states that
her finances are improving and that she intends to pay her debts one at a time until they are paid.
The Judge concluded: The actions of Applicant’s first husband in largely failing to pay child
support were beyond her control.  Her second husband’s actions in running the business were also
beyond her control, as were the ultimate failure of the business and her unemployment.  However,
even giving Applicant the benefit of the doubt and crediting her with resolving all the debts she
indicated were paid, disputed or discharged in bankruptcy, her failure to pay state sales taxes while
running the business was irresponsible.  Also, she has not acted responsibly toward her obligation
to pay her federal taxes.  Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances and has not
made a good-faith effort to pay all her debts.  Her finances are not yet under control.  Her financial
issues are recent and ongoing, and there is no indication that they are unlikely to recur.  They
continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  Applicant is
headed in the right direction, but shirking her tax responsibilities is not the way to get there.    
Applicant asserts that she has come a long way and has made great strides to overcome past
financial issues.  She states that she has paid out over $15,000 in payments to either clear up or start
to clear up past issues.  Applicant feels that she has been proactive in handling her financial issues,
and that she has mitigated the security concerns caused by her debt difficulties.  Applicant’s
assertions do not establish error on the part of the Judge.    
 The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25157at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 4,
2008).  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had a lengthy history of not
meeting financial obligations, including a prior Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and a significant period where
she failed to pay timely sales taxes while operating a business.  He noted that despite some progress,
at the time of the hearing Applicant still had a significant amount of overdue indebtedness, including
outstanding tax delinquencies.  In light of the foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that
Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-07747 at 2 (App.
Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).  A review of the Judge’s decision reveals that, regarding Guideline F, the Judge
listed the potentially applicable mitigating conditions and then discussed several components of
those factors in his analysis.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant as to a number of the Guideline
F allegations.  However, the Judge offered a narrative explanation as to why the disqualifying
conduct under Guideline F was not fully mitigated.  Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge
erred when he weighed the mitigating evidence against the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
