 
1 
 
 
 
  
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00406 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Coworker, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s home went to 
foreclosure; he owes more than $14,000 for two federal tax liens, and has other 
delinquent charged-off or collection accounts. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate 
the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 18, 2013, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On July 16, 2013, Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing. On September 14, 2013, I was assigned the case. On 
November 7, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing convened on November 21, 2013. I admitted 
Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through R, without 
objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The record was held open for ten days to 
allow Applicant to submit additional information. (Tr. 77) No additional material was 
received. On December 2, 2013, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied owing the debts listed in SOR 1.g, 
1.i, 1 j, 1.r, and 1.s, stating they were paid. He denied the debt listed in SOR 1.t stating, 
“removal from property.” He neither admitted nor denied the allegations listed in 1.c and 
1.h. He admitted the remaining debts. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR 
allegations in my findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old consultant who has worked for a defense contractor 
since February 2011 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 34) Applicant was 
represented by a coworker who stated Applicant was well liked. He submitted four 
character reference letters. (Ex. A, B, C, and D) Applicant’s coworkers, supervisors, and 
friends state: Applicant is hard-working, trusted, punctual, honest, responsible, and a 
model employee who is willing to stay late to complete the work and takes pride in his 
work. He does volunteer work in the local community. His representative stated he had 
Applicant’s current credit report, but failed to introduce it into the record. (Ex. 20) 
Department Counsel submitted Applicant’s credit reports: February 22, 2013 (Ex. 3) and 
October 13, 2011 (Ex. 4). Applicant is pending a promotion if he receives a clearance. 
(Tr. 92)  
 
 In October 2011, Applicant stated he was immediately going to contact all of his 
delinquent creditors and set up payment plans. At that time, he stated his financial 
status was “good.” He has steady income and sufficient funds to commence paying his 
debts. (SOR Answer) In March 2013, he responded to written financial interrogatories. 
(Ex. 2) He stated he had no financial or tax records dated prior to January 2010. He 
stated all of his records were destroyed by vandals in 2009. (Ex. 2) 
 
 From March 1998 until December 2010, Applicant was a self-employed 
remodeling contractor. (Ex. 2) Due to the declining economy, his business declined in 
revenue, becoming totally unprofitable in February 2011. In 2007, his income was less 
than $5,000 and not more than $10,000 in 2008. (Tr. 41, 42) In December 2010, he 
moved to his current state to help his cousin who was suffering from a heart condition. 
(Tr. 35) He moved in with his cousin on his cousin’s farm. (Tr. 36) He spent his time 
caring for his cousin and his cousin’s ranch animals. (Ex. 2) From December 2010 until 
February 2011, he was unemployed. In July 2013, he left the farm. (Tr. 38) 
 
 In October 1999, Applicant purchased a home after making a $5,000 down 
payment. (Tr. 66) He does not say what he paid for the home, only that it had a 13 
percent interest rate on the mortgage. (Tr. 69) His monthly mortgage payments were 
$750. (Tr. 68, 69) He asserted he was able to make his mortgage payments until May 
 
3 
 
 
 
2007,2 when the account became delinquent. (Ex. 2) He made no further payments. In 
May 2009, the home went to foreclosure and was repossessed by the real estate 
company that financed the home. (Ex. 2) He listed on his e-QIP that the home was 
valued at $70,000. (Ex. 1) Applicant asserts the lender has not brought an action to 
collect the deficit. (Tr. 67) He believes he owes nothing following the foreclosure.  
 
 Applicant provided no information as to the state law concerning deficiencies 
following a foreclosure. Normally the state law allows the creditor to obtain a deficiency 
judgment following foreclosure. The state law provides an exception if the purchase was 
money mortgage referred to in the state as a seller-financed mortgage, which it appears 
to be, and if the lender used a nonjudicial foreclosure process. On his e-QIP, Applicant 
states the foreclosure was handled by the county court, which may indicate this was not 
a nonjudicial foreclosure proceeding. (Ex. 1) 
 
 Applicant filed his 2002, 2003, and 2005 federal tax returns in a timely manner, 
but owed additional tax on the returns. (Tr. 29) In April 2002, a $7,462 tax lien was 
levied. In May 2004, a $10,391 tax lien was levied, and in April 2005, a $4,307 tax lien 
was levied. (Ex. 2, 3) He believes $10,000 of his IRS debt is no longer owed due to the 
statute of limitations. (Tr. 44) He arranged a $300 monthly repayment agreement with 
the IRS, but made no payments after the initial payment due to lack of income. (Ex. 2, 
Tr. 32) In July 2011, he submitted an offer to the IRS asking that all interest and 
penalties be forgiven. As of October 2011, the IRS had not replied to his offer. On his 
September 2011 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he 
stated he was attempting to negotiate a solution to his unpaid taxes. In January 2012, 
he met with a new IRS agent after moving to his current state. (Tr. 33) 
 
 On March 12, 2013, Applicant was scheduled to deposit $1,500 with a tax 
resolution service. (Ex. G-1) He was to make eight $468 monthly payments from March 
2013 through November 2013. (Ex. G-1) The tax service’s fee is $5,250. (Tr. 25) He 
provided no documentation showing payment in accord with the agreement but 
asserted he had made his last payment to the tax service in November 2013. (Tr. 73) 
He asserted the tax service, once paid, would enter into negotiations with the IRS in an 
attempt to establish a repayment plan to repay the entire amount owed. (Tr. 22, 23) He 
states he currently owes the IRS approximately $10,000, but provided no 
documentation from the IRS establishing the debt amount. (Tr. 24) He asserted he has 
filed and paid state and federal taxes for all other years. (Tr. 30) 
 
 In 2008, Applicant borrowed money from his girlfriend to buy a motorcycle. (Tr. 
63) In July 2009, the account went past due. (Ex. 2) In December 2009, a $1,600 
judgment was entered in favor of his ex-girlfriend. She obtained a writ of seizure and 
had Applicant’s truck seized. He paid his ex-girlfriend, satisfying the judgment, and he 
retrieved his truck. (Ex. 2, Tr. 64) He still has the truck. (Tr. 64) 
 
 Applicant provided documentation that he paid a total of $5,081 on his debts. He 
paid $1,675 in federal tax (Ex. G) and approximately $1,500 in other SOR debts. (Ex. H, 
                                                          
2 During the 91 months, he made his $750 monthly mortgage payments and he paid approximately 
$68,000. Not knowing the value that was borrowed, it is impossible to determine how much the principle 
owed on the mortgage was reduced by these payments.  
 
4 
 
 
 
I, J, K, L) He paid approximately $1,900 in other non-SOR debts. He paid a $100 to a 
hospital for x-rays not covered by his health insurance (Ex. M, Tr. 26), approximately 
$1,200 for dental treatment (Ex. O, Tr. 27), $70 for medicine (Ex. R), $10 for an eye 
examination (Ex. R), and approximately $600 to repay family members. (Ex. Q, Tr. 28)  
 
 Applicant’s monthly net remainder (gross income less deductions, expenses, and 
bill payments) is approximately $500. (Tr. 71) He has $350 in his checking account and 
has no retirement fund. (Tr. 72, 74) He is current on his utility bills. (Tr. 72) A summary 
of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for collection, other 
unpaid obligations, and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a IRS tax lien filed in April 
2005. (Ex. 3, 4) 
 
$4,037 Partially paid. January 17, 2012, 
Applicant paid $1,000 by money order. 
(Ex. 2, Ex. G-2, Ex.G-3) April 2, 2012, 
he paid $675 by money order. (Ex. 2, 
Ex. G-3)  
b IRS tax lien filed in May 
2004. (Ex. 3, 4)  
$10,391 
 
Unpaid. 
c Collection account. (Ex. 
3, 4) He neither admitted 
nor denied. 
$757 
 
Unpaid. In October 2011, Applicant was 
unsure about this debt. At the hearing, 
he was again unsure about the debt. He 
has had no recent contact with the 
creditor. (Tr. 45) 
d Charged-off automobile 
loan. (Ex. 3, 4) 
 
$140 Unpaid. At the hearing, Applicant stated 
he wanted to pay the larger debts first. 
In October 2011, he did not recognize 
the debt and could not provide any 
information on the debt. He has had no 
recent contact with the creditor. (Tr. 45)  
e Collection account on an 
account that had been 
charged off. (Ex. 3, 4)  
 
 
$384 Unpaid. In October 2011, Applicant did 
not recall the debt and could not provide 
any information on the debt. At the 
hearing, he stated he had called them 
and learned the debt had been sold and 
transferred. (Tr. 45) He has no idea who 
currently holds this debt. (Tr. 46)  
f Charged-off credit card 
account. Card used for 
gasoline and business 
purchases. Account 
transferred to another 
collection firm. Balance is 
0. (Ex. 3, 4) 
$300 Unpaid duplicate account. This is the 
same debt as SOR 1.m and SOR 1.n. 
At the hearing, Applicant said he was 
going to immediately contact the 
creditor, but has had no recent contact 
with the creditor. (Tr. 47, 58). 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
g Collection account for a 
bank debt. (Ex. 3, 4) 
Collection account of 
$748 reported October 
2011. (Ex. 4)  
Applicant denied this debt 
and alleged he paid it.  
$923 Unpaid. In October 2011, Applicant did 
not recognize the debt when asked 
about the account. (Ex.2) It was 
charged off in April 2008 and his credit 
report lists a 0 balance. (Tr. 51)  
h Charged-off account. 
Account transferred or 
sold. (Ex. 3) Applicant 
neither agreed with nor 
denied this debt in his 
SOR answer. 
$52 Unpaid. In October 2011, Applicant did 
not recall the debt and could not provide 
any information on the debt. (Ex. 2) He 
listed this debt in the amount of $608 on 
his e-QIP. He has had no recent contact 
with the creditor. (Tr. 52)  
i Charged-off bank 
account. Account 
transferred or sold. (Ex. 
3) Applicant denied the 
debt in his SOR Answer 
alleging he had paid it. 
$150 Paid. (Ex. L) Applicant’s October 2011 
credit report lists the same account 
number. Attempt to collect this debt was 
also made by the collection agency in 
SOR 1.r. (Tr. 52) 
j Collection account. (Ex. 
4) Applicant denied the 
debt in his SOR Answer 
alleging he had paid it. 
 
$517 Partially paid. On September 17, 2012, 
Applicant made a $218 payment. (Ex. 2, 
Ex. H, Tr. 59) Additional money is still 
owed on this debt. (Tr. 59) He provided 
no documentation from the creditor. (Tr. 
57) (Ex. 4, Ex. K)  
k Charged-off account. (Ex. 
4) 
$122 Unpaid. In October 2011, he stated he 
did not recall the debt and could not 
provide any information on the debt. 
(Ex. 2) He has had no recent contact 
with the creditor. (Tr. 58)  
l Telephone company 
collection account. (Ex. 4)  
$432 
 
Unpaid. In October 2011, Applicant did 
not recall the debt and could not provide 
any information on the debt. (Ex.2) He 
has had no recent contact with 
creditor.(Tr. 58) 
m Collection account.  $458 
 
Unpaid. This is the same debt as SOR 
1.f and SOR 1.n. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
n Collection account. (Ex. 
4)  
$458 Unpaid. This is the same debt as SOR 
1.f and SOR 1.m. (Ex. 4) 
o Mobile telephone service 
collection account. (Ex. 5) 
 
$419 
 
Unpaid. In October 2011, Applicant did 
not recognize the debt and had made 
no payments on the debt. (Ex. 2) 
Applicant has had no recent contact 
with creditor.(Tr. 58) 
p Collection account. (Ex. 
4)  
$1,004 
 
Settled for $186. (Ex. I, Tr. 59) Applicant 
has received no documentation from the 
creditor showing the debt has been 
settled. (Tr. 61) He has had no contact 
with the creditor since May 2012. (Tr. 
62)  
q Collection account 
collecting for a cable 
company. (Ex. 4) NCO  
 
$140 
 
Unpaid. In October 2011, Applicant did 
not recall the debt and could not provide 
any information on the debt. (Ex.2) He 
has had no recent contact with creditor. 
(Tr. 62) 
r Collection account. (Ex. 
4) Applicant denied the 
debt in his SOR Answer 
alleging he had paid this 
debt. 
$698 
 
Paid. (Ex. L) Applicant’s October 2011 
credit report lists the same account 
number. Attempt to collect this debt was 
also made by the collection agency in 
SOR 1.i.  
s Judgment. Applicant 
denied the debt in his 
SOR Answer alleging he 
had paid the judgment. 
$1,734 
 
Paid. At the hearing, Applicant stated he 
could obtain a document showing the 
judgment was paid. (Tr. 62) No 
documentation was received. However, 
the matter appears to have been settled 
on February 19, 2010. (Tr. 65) 
t Real Estate mortgage 
foreclosure. Applicant 
denied the debt in his 
SOR Answer stating, 
“Removal from property” 
$75,000 Resolved. In October 1999, Applicant 
purchased a home in North Carolina. He 
made $750 monthly mortgage payments 
until May 2007. (Ex. 2) He had made 
approximately $68,000 in mortgage 
payments on the house. In May 2009, 
the home went into foreclosure and 
lender repossessed the property. (Ex. 2)  
 Total debt listed in SOR  A $75,000 home foreclosure, $14,423 in 
federal tax liens, and $8,000 of 
additional debt.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had a $75,000 home 
foreclosure, $14,423 in federal tax liens, and $8,000 of additional debt. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
To date, Applicant’s efforts to address his delinquent accounts have been 
minimal. Because he has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems are 
continuing in nature, he receives minimal application of the mitigating condition listed in 
AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Without a meaningful track 
record3 of actual resolution of debts, it is unknown whether the debts will, in fact, be 
resolved in the future. His history of failure to make consistent attempts to resolve his 
debts raises questions as to his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant asserts he hired a tax service to assist him in negotiating with the IRS 
on his two remaining tax liens. He states he has paid their fee, but provided no 
documents showing payment. Additionally, there is no showing of any negotiation or 
that a repayment plan has been reached.  The IRS tax liens remain unresolved.  
 
Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by the decline in the home 
improvement trade. He was unemployed from December 2010 until February 2011, 
when he obtained his current job. “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, 
in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his or her control, the Judge could still 
consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with 
those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
December 1, 1999)). A component is whether he maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
In October 2011, Applicant stated he was going to immediately contact his 
creditor and establish repayment plans. This he did not do. His failure to do so casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) is limited 
in application. Applicant has not had recent contact with the majority of his creditors. He 
has failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. Overall, the partial 
                                                          
3 The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of 
debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in 
the SOR. All that is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent 
debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of 
Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible and 
realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. 
Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations 
omitted). 
 
10 
 
 
 
mitigation available to Applicant under AG ¶ 20(b) is insufficient to outweigh the 
disqualifying conditions that apply. 
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because there is no indication Applicant has received 
financial counseling. Additionally, there are no clear indications that his financial 
problem is being resolved or is under control. 
 
There is no documentary evidence to support his assertions that he contacted 
the majority of his creditors and tried to arrange repayment plans. He talked about doing 
so and promised to do so, but there is no documentation that any repayment plan was 
reached. Applicant has failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his 
delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant would like to pay his bills. However, a promise of future performance, 
no matter how sincere, is insufficient to demonstrate a track record of meeting financial 
obligations. Without evidence of steps taken to implement a plan to resolve 
indebtedness, a good-faith effort cannot be substantiated.  
 
Applicant established he had paid approximately $3,000 on five of his debts. 
But only $1,250 of this had been paid recently.  The $1,734 judgment that resulted in 
the seizure of his truck was paid in 2010. AG & 20(d) applies to these four4 
obligations (SOR 1.i, 1.p, 1.r, and 1.s). The debts listed in SOR 1.f, 1.m, and 1.n 
represent the same obligations, which remain unpaid. I find for Applicant as to the 
duplicate accounts listed in SOR 1.f and 1.n. 
 
 In October 1999, Applicant purchased a home, made a $5,000 down payment, 
and paid $68,000 on the home until May 2007, when he stopped making his mortgage 
payments due to a lack of income. He asserts he owes nothing on the property. There is 
no evidence that the lender has brought an action to collect the deficit and the collection 
maybe barred by state law. I find for him as to SOR 1.t.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
                                                          
4 Applicant made a $218 payment on SOR 1.j, but this did not pay the full debt.  
 
11 
 
 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He went through a period of unemployment and also 
underemployment when in the home improvement trade. After a period of inaction 
during which he did not address his past delinquent accounts, he asserts he has 
initiated some effort to address his IRS debt. He asserted he paid a tax service to assist 
him with his federal tax liens. He provided no documentation showing the service was 
paid. More importantly, the tax service has not obtained a repayment agreement with 
the IRS. Additionally, the majority of his delinquent debts, even the four debts that are 
less than $150 each, remain unpaid. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While the period of unemployment and reduced earnings were circumstances beyond 
his control, he either had no ability or no intention of paying his delinquent accounts. He 
stated he failed to pay the small delinquent accounts because he was concentrating on 
the larger tax debt. His long-standing failure to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable 
amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from 
his financial considerations.  
 
As stated in Applicant’s closing argument, “if we were having this conversation 
one more year from now, I believed everything would be resolved by [Applicant].” (Tr. 
90) This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or 
will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award of 
a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a — e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g and h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j — m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o — q:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r — t:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
