 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10679 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
E, personal conduct, F, financial considerations, G, alcohol consumption, and H, drug 
involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines E, personal 
conduct, F, financial considerations, G, alcohol consumption, and H, drug involvement. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 1, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 7, 2013. 
 
2 
 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 14, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 5, 2013. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any documentary evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR, but noted some changes. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He married in 1990 and divorced in 2003. He has four 
daughters from the marriage. The eldest is 20 years old, and he has triplets age 14. He 
remarried in March 2012. He has been employed by a federal contractor since 2009. 
Applicant held a security clearance from about 1989 to 2001. He is a high school 
graduate and completed two years of vocational school.1  
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed all 17 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. The 
debts total approximately $12,500 and range from $30 to $5,542. None of the debts are 
paid or resolved.2  
 
 Applicant failed to file both his Federal and state income tax returns for tax year 
2010 until April 2012. He has had a payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) for about a year and pays $50 a month.3  
 
 Applicant admitted that with varying frequency he used marijuana from 1977 to 
2007. He used heroin with varying frequency from 2002 to 2007. He used cocaine with 
varying frequency from the mid-1990s until 2007. He used crack cocaine with varying 
frequency from 2002 to 2007.4 
 
 In about April 2008, Applicant was discharged from a substance abuse treatment 
facility with a discharge diagnosis, made by a licensed professional counselor and 
certified addiction counselor, of opiate dependence in early full remission and cocaine 
dependence in early full remission.5  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 21, 45, 56-57. 
 
2 GE 10, 11. 
 
3 Tr. 17-18; GE 8. 
 
4 Tr. 18-19; GE 2, 9. 
 
5 GE 7. 
 
3 
 
 
 In December 2007, Applicant was discharged from a substance abuse treatment 
facility with a discharge diagnosis, made by a medical doctor, of opiate dependence, 
cocaine dependence, and alcohol abuse.6 
 
 In October 2007, the Probate Court of the state where Applicant resided found 
Applicant to be chemically dependent and ordered him to attend involuntary inpatient 
treatment.7  
 
In April 2007, Applicant left a substance abuse treatment facility prior to 
completion of a program. He was diagnosed by a certified addiction counselor with 
heroine dependence, cocaine dependence, both with physiological dependence.8  
 
 In about 2006, Applicant was pulled over by police. He was in possession of a 
crack pipe that he used to smoke crack cocaine. 
 
 In about August 2004, Applicant was discharged from a substance abuse 
treatment facility with a discharge diagnosis, by a certified addiction counselor, of opiate 
dependence and cocaine dependence, both with physiological dependence.9  
 
 In about November 1999, Applicant was discharged from a substance abuse 
treatment facility with a discharge diagnosis, made by a certified addiction counselor, of 
alcohol abuse.10  
 
 In about 1998, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana and drug 
paraphernalia.11  
 
  In about May 1988, Applicant was convicted of driving under the influence 
of alcohol (DUI).12 
 
 Applicant falsified his May 3, 1999, security clearance application (SCA) when he 
deliberately denied using any illegal drugs in the past seven years. He, in fact, had been 
using marijuana from 1977 to the date of the SCA, and cocaine from at least the mid-
1990s to the date of the SCA. He also deliberately falsified his December 23, 2000 SCA 
when he denied using any illegal drugs, when he had, in fact, used them as stated 
                                                          
6 Tr. 46; GE 7. 
 
7 GE 7. 
 
8 GE 7. 
 
9 GE 7. 
 
10 GE 7. 
 
11 GE 6. 
 
12 GE 6. 
 
4 
 
 
above. At his hearing, Applicant stated he did not answer honestly because he was 
aggravated with his company for requiring him to obtain a security clearance. He 
acknowledged that he hated his past, so he did not take completion of the SCA 
seriously.13 
 
Applicant falsified his April 13, 2012 SCA, when he deliberately failed to disclose 
under Section 22 that he had been arrested for possession of marijuana and drug 
paraphernalia and DUI. Applicant testified that he failed to disclose the information 
because he thought it only went back ten years. Under Section 23 that asked about his 
drug use in the past seven years, he disclosed he used illegal narcotics from January 
2007 to December 2007. That information was false as he used heroin from 2002 to 
2007, marijuana from 1977 to 2007, cocaine from the mid-1990s to 2007, and crack 
cocaine from 2002 to 2007. Applicant testified that he did not know why he failed to 
disclose this information. Applicant also deliberately failed to disclose his drug treatment 
in 2004 and 2008. He testified that he “botched” disclosing his past drug treatment.14 
 
In his April 13, 2012 SCA, under Section 26, Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose his failure to file both his Federal and state income tax returns for 2010 until 
April 2012.15 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on June 11, 2012. 
During his interview he deliberately denied ever having any alcohol or drug-related 
criminal charges or arrests, which was false. He stated that he used crack cocaine for 
the six months preceding November 2007 and had never otherwise used crack cocaine 
or any other illegal substances not already addressed in his interview. He deliberately 
failed to disclose that in addition to his 2007 use of crack cocaine, he used cocaine in 
crack form from 2002 to 2007, and powder cocaine from the mid-1990s to 2007. He 
testified he thought the inquiry only went back ten years and he misunderstood the 
question.16 
 
 Applicant deliberately falsified facts in his July 17, 2013, responses to 
government interrogatories when he stated that he used marijuana from 1977 to 1998, 
when in truth he used it from 1977 through 2007. He falsely stated he used crack 
cocaine once daily for a month before entering rehabilitation, whereas in truth Applicant 
used crack cocaine from 2002 to 2007, and powder cocaine from the mid-1990s to 
2007. Applicant also deliberately provided false information when he stated he used 
heroine in 2007 only, when in fact he used heroin from 2002 through 2007.17  
 
                                                          
13Tr. 32-36; GE 3, 4. 
 
14 Tr. 36-38; GE 1. 
 
15 Tr. 39-40; GE 1. 
 
16 Tr. 40-42, 50-51; GE 2. 
 
17 Tr. 43-44; GE 2. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he deliberately did not disclose the extent of his past 
illegal drug use during the investigative interview because he wanted to “block it out” of 
his memory, and he did not want to remember it.18  
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs after being granted a secret security clearance by 
the Department of Defense in the early to mid-1990s until approximately 2001.19 When 
asked when the last time he used any illegal drug was, Applicant admitted he smoked 
marijuana in October 2013. After he completed the drug treatment program in 
December 2007, he continued to occasionally smoke marijuana at parties. He stated he 
does not like to smoke marijuana, but if it is given to him he smokes it. He admitted he 
is influenced by other people and after having a couple of beers he will use it. He 
testified that most of the time he refuses the marijuana. He admitted he was told when 
he was discharged from the rehabilitation facility to abstain from illegal drug use. He did 
not. He does not believe he has a current drug problem because he is not using cocaine 
or heroin. He stated he will not use marijuana in the future.20 
 
 Applicant admitted that he continues to consume alcohol every other day. The 
last time he was intoxicated was a month ago. He does not believe he is an alcoholic. 
Applicant stated he has dyslexia and difficulty comprehending written material. He 
regrets his past actions.21  
 
 Applicant was unemployed from May 2006 to January 2008. During this period 
his mother passed away, and he inherited about $60,000. He used the money to buy a 
motorcycle and purchase drugs.22  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
18 Tr. 52-53. 
 
19 Tr. 20-25. 
 
20 Tr. 21-32, 45. 
 
21 Tr. 28-29, 47. 
 
22 Tr. 48-50. 
 
6 
 
 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant admits that he owes 17 delinquent debts, which he is unable or 
unwilling to pay or resolve. The debts total approximately $12,500 and range from $30 
to $5,542. He failed to file his 2010 Federal and state income tax returns on time. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and remain unresolved. There is no evidence that these debts were due to conditions 
beyond Applicant’s control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Some of the debts are small. 
None of the debts are paid or resolved. Applicant did not provide a plan for resolving the 
delinquent debts. There are no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
being resolved or under control. Nor is there evidence that he made a good-faith effort 
to pay or resolve them. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and the following five are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Appellant has an extensive illegal drug abuse history dating from 1977 to the 
present. He held a security clearance from about 1989 to 2001. He attended drug 
treatment on several occasions. He was last diagnosed in December 2007 by a medical 
doctor with opiate dependence, cocaine dependence, and alcohol abuse. He was also 
diagnosed by certified addiction counselors with the same dependencies, but these 
diagnoses do not fall within the above disqualifying conditions. There is sufficient 
evidence of Applicant’s drug abuse, possession of illegal drugs, and possession of drug 
paraphernalia to establish the application of AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), 25(d), and 25(g). 
Applicant continues to use marijuana and alcohol. His last use of marijuana was two 
months ago and subsequent to applying for a security clearance. He testified he would 
not use marijuana in the future, which testimony is not credible based on his extensive 
history of substance abuse I find he failed to clearly and convincingly commit to 
discontinue drug use by his continuing to use marijuana as recently as two months 
before his hearing. Applicant completed several drug treatment programs, discontinued 
 
9 
 
 
using illegal drugs for a period of time, and then relapsed by using illegal drugs. His 
most recent treatment program was December 2007, after which he continued to use 
illegal substances. I find AG ¶ 25(h) applies.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 
26, including the following three: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to support the application of any of the above 
mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependent and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant had a DUI conviction in 1988. He attended inpatient drug and alcohol 
rehabilitation treatment and was diagnosed by a medical doctor and other certified 
addiction counselors with alcohol abuse. Applicant continues to consume alcohol 
regularly and become intoxicated. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 including 
the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol on a regular basis and drink to 
intoxication monthly. Applicant has a substantial history of addiction. He did not present 
evidence of a favorable prognosis from any health care providers. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude that alcohol is no longer a problem. None of the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
11 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant has been a heavy drug abuser for 30 years. He repeatedly used illegal 
drugs while holding a security clearance for many years. He was diagnosed with drug 
dependency and alcohol abuse. He was convicted of DUI in 1988. He was arrested for 
drug possession 1998. He unsuccessfully participated in drug and alcohol treatment 
programs several times. He deliberately lied on three SCAs and during interviews with 
government investigators. He lied when responding to government interrogatories. He 
failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for 2010 on time. The above three 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant admitted his numerous falsifications and all of his drug and alcohol 
issues. His falsifications are extensive and recent. He used drugs for years while 
holding a security clearance. Even after completing his most recent SCA in 2012, he 
continued to use illegal drugs. None of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E, F, G, and H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. 
He used illegal drugs for many years, including while holding a security clearance. He 
continued to use drugs after completing drug treatment and used marijuana as recently 
as two months ago. He repeatedly lied on his SCAs and to government investigators 
about his background. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the personal conduct, financial considerations, alcohol consumption and 
drug involvement guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
13 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.l   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a-4.r:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
