1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-11792
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jennifer Heald Castillo, Esq. 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has strong
and long-standing family and employment ties to the United States. But those ties do
not outweigh and overcome his recent marital ties to Iran, a country that is hostile to the
United States. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On or about May 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Tr. 84–87. 2
 Tr. 85–86. 3
 Appellant Exhibit I. 4
 Appellant Exhibit II. 5
 Appellant Exhibit III.  6
2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.1
The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the
security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence based on ties to Iran.    
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on September 11, 2013. The hearing on October 9, 2013, was
cancelled due to the shutdown of the federal government. The hearing then took place
on November 20, 2013. The transcript (Tr.) was received December 3, 2013. 
Ruling on Procedure
At the close of hearing, I proposed taking administrative notice of certain facts
about Iran as set forth in a June 13, 2012 decision I issued in ISCR Case No. 11-
03809.  The proposal was to supplement not subsume facts that both counsel had2
requested administrative notice. And the proposal was contingent upon both parties
having no objections. Both counsel expressed an interest in reviewing the cited case,
and both counsel stated they could file a response to my proposal by the end of the
following week, which was Friday, November 29, 2013.3
Post-hearing, I notified counsel by e-mail of the cited case and again directed
them to reply by close-of-business November 29, 2013.  Applicant’s Counsel timely4
replied on November 27, 2013, expressing no objections.  Department Counsel5
untimely replied on December 4, 2013, expressing objections.  As my proposal was6
contingent upon both parties having no objections, I will not take notice of the matters
as detailed in ISCR Case No. 11-03809, and I will limit such matters to those requested
by the parties during the hearing.  
 Exhibits 1, 3, 4, and 5. 7
 Tr. 34. 8
 Tr. 24–25; Administrative notice was taken of Exhibit D at 25–26 (discussing the history of persecution of9
members of the Baha’i Faith, which was founded in Iran in the mid-19th century).
 Exhibit 1. 10
3
Findings of Fact
In his nine-page answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations set forth in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.e; he also provided detailed explanations. His admissions and
explanations are accepted and adopted and incorporated as findings of fact. In addition,
the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His educational
background includes a bachelor’s degree in arts and letters awarded in 2004; a
bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering and physics in 2006; and a master’s degree
in systems management awarded in 2008. He has worked as a software engineer for a
large aerospace company since about June 2011. Before that, he worked for the same
aerospace company as an electronic and electrical engineer during 2008–2011. He is
seeking to obtain a security clearance from the DOD for the first time. To that end, he
completed a security clearance application in August 2011; he was interviewed during a
background investigation in September 2011; he provided a five-page affidavit in May
2012; and he provided supplemental information in March 2013.7
Applicant was born in Iran, where he lived with his mother, father, sister, and two
brothers. With his family’s assistance to pay for a smuggler, he fled Iran in 1984 and
traveled to Pakistan.  His family joined him later in Pakistan. His family fled Iran8
because of their religious faith of Baha’i, a religion that is subject to persecution in Iran.9
Applicant and his family remained in Pakistan until 1986, when they were allowed
to immigrate to the United States as religious refugees. They settled in a state in the
Pacific Northwest where they remain to this day (except for one brother). Applicant
became a U.S. permanent resident alien in 1987 and a U.S. citizen in 1992; his parents
and siblings are U.S. citizens as well. 
Applicant’s first marriage ended in divorce. He married a native-born U.S. citizen
in 2001; they separated in about September 2010; and they divorced in July 2011. The
marriage produced two sons, both of whom live with Applicant. He bought a primary
residence in 2011. He has no business, financial, or property interests in Iran or any
other foreign country. 
Applicant disclosed four foreign contacts when he completed his 2011 security
clearance application.  He contacted the four individuals to facilitate and arrange his10
2013 marriage to a citizen of Iran. The four foreign contacts are described as follows:
 Exhibit 3 at 1–2. 11
 Exhibit 3. 12
 Exhibits A and B. 13
 Tr. 50–51. 14
 Tr. 40–41; Exhibit C (discussing politics and governments in the Baha’i Faith). 15
4
(1) since February 2011, a brother of his intended bride with contact via telephone and
e-mail about three to seven times per year; (2) since January 2011, his intended bride
via telephone and e-mail more than 15 times per year; (3) since June 2011, a brother of
his intended bride with contact via telephone and e-mail about three to seven times per
year; and (4) during March and April 2011, the cousin of his mother with contact via
telephone one to two times. 
Applicant initiated contact with his now wife in about January 2011, after being
put in touch with her via a network of his cousin in the United States, his cousin’s
business partner, and the business partner’s spouse.  His now wife was a never-11
married woman who was a homemaker who cared for her mother; she lived with her
mother and a brother. His contact consisted mainly of telephone calls, but also included
e-mail and the occasional letter. As of May 2012, he reported speaking to his now wife
by telephone four to seven times daily.  12
Applicant traveled to a country in the Middle East in 2012 to meet his now wife.
Upon deciding to marry, he traveled to a country in the Middle East in January 2013 to
accompany his now wife for an immigration interview at a U.S. Embassy. Once
immigration authorities approved the paperwork, he traveled again to a country in the
Middle East in February 2013 to accompany her to the United States. They married in
March 2013 almost immediately upon her arrival here. He has not had contact with
anyone in Iran since his February 2013 trip. His wife is a full-time homemaker and is
caring for Applicant’s two sons. She has submitted the necessary paperwork to adjust
her immigration status to permanent resident alien and her application is pending.  She13
intends to apply for U.S. citizenship when she is eligible. 
Applicant now has in-laws who are citizens of and residents in Iran. His mother-
in-law and two brothers-in-law are citizens of and residents in Iran. One brother-in-law is
in charge of a company and the other is employed as an accountant. His own extended
family consists of a distant cousin, his mother’s cousin as noted above with whom he
had contact with to arrange the marriage. Applicant’s wife has regular contact with her
mother, and sometimes her brothers, by telephone, and on occasion Applicant will say
hello.  14
During the hearing, Applicant pointed out that a central teaching of the Baha’i
Faith is to shun politics and be obedient to the government in power in the place where
you reside.  He made this point to emphasize his fidelity and obedience to the U.S.15
 Tr. 37–38. 16
 Tr. 38–39. 17
 Tr. 39. 18
 Exhibit 6.  19
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to20
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.21
5
Government in the context of his application for a security clearance. In addition,
Applicant expressed a concern that as a practicing member of the Baha’i Faith, as well
as someone who fled Iran and became a U.S. citizen, it is likely that Iranian authorities
would consider him a spy subject to prosecution and possible execution if he traveled to
Iran.  He stated that his wife may be in danger or at risk should she return to Iran.  He16 17
also stated that they are unsure if his wife will travel to Iran in the future.    18
Concerning Iran, formally known as Persia, officially known as the Islamic
Republic of Iran since 1980, I took administrative notice of the facts as set forth in
Department Counsel’s written request,  which are summarized or condensed to the19
following matters. The February 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran, then a key U.S. ally,
opened a long rift in relations between Iran and the United States. On November 4,
1979, radical students seized the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, and then held hostages until
shortly after President Reagan’s inauguration on January 20, 1981. The United States
severed relations with Iran in 1980, and the two countries have had no official dialogue
since. The U.S. Government has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism, and it
has special concerns about four particular areas of Iranian behavior: (1) its efforts to
acquire weapons of mass destruction (e.g., its nuclear program); (2) its support of and
involvement with terrorism; (3) its support of violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process; and (4) its dismal record of human rights. Because Iran does not recognize
dual citizenship, Iranian-born-naturalized U.S. citizens are considered solely Iranian
citizens by Iranian authorities, and they are required to enter and exit Iran using an
Iranian passport. When in Iran, they may be subject to surveillance, search,
harassment, arrest, and detention or imprisonment. In addition, time will tell if the recent
and ongoing diplomatic efforts to resolve tensions over Iran’s nuclear program will alter
the security situation with Iran.  
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As20
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt21
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 22
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 23
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.26
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 28
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).29
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.30
6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An22
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  23
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting24
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An25
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate26
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme27
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.28
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.29
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it30
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 31
 AG ¶ 6. 32
7
Discussion
The gravamen of the SOR is whether Applicant’s recent marital ties to Iran
disqualify him from eligibility for a security clearance. Under Guideline B for foreign
influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt due to31
foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.32
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s ties to Iran, I have especially considered the following disqualifying
conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of a resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information.
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; 
8
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
AG ¶ 8(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
Applicant has multiple indicators of being a mature, responsible, and trustworthy
person. And I found him to be sincere, serious, and credible at the hearing. Due to his
birth in Iran, Applicant remains a citizen of Iran in the eyes of that country,
notwithstanding the circumstances of his departure from there in 1984 and his eventual
residence in and citizenship with the United States. Since his arrival here, he has
worked steadily and pursued higher education to improve his position and station in life.
He has multiple college degrees, and he now works for a large aerospace company. As
his first marriage was ending, he was introduced to a native of Iran. He had extensive
contact with her via frequent telephone calls, and he made multiple trips to the Middle
East to facilitate the marriage and accompany her to the United States. He duly
reported his contact with her, along with three other citizens of Iran, when he completed
his 2011 security clearance application. He also provided detailed information about his
foreign contacts during the security clearance process. He intends for his wife to
become a U.S. citizen, although she is not yet eligible to apply. His ties or connections
to his spouse’s family members in Iran are not hindered by a language barrier, and his
own infrequent contact with them is offset by his wife’s close relationships with them.
Looking forward, although it is unlikely that Applicant will travel to Iran, it would not be
unusual for his wife to travel to Iran sometime in the future to visit her family.  
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has ties to Iran based on his birth in that country as well as his
recent marriage to an Iranian citizen. Those circumstances require careful scrutiny
because Iran is a country that is hostile to the United States and poses serious security
concerns. With that said, Applicant is a long-time resident and citizen of the United
States, he has significant employment and educational ties to the United States, and his
own immediate family members are U.S. citizens and residents. In other words, his ties
to the United States are strong. Nevertheless, Iran’s hostility to the United States and
the heightened risk it creates place a heavy burden on Applicant to show his ties to Iran
are mitigated. The best evidence of his ties to Iran are (1) his recent marriage to an
Iranian citizen, (2) his wife’s immediate family members in Iran, and (3) the not
unrealistic probability that his wife will travel to Iran sometime in the future. Considering
those circumstances as a whole, I cannot conclude that it is unlikely that Applicant will
be placed in a position of compromise or conflict in a security clearance context. The
situation in Iran is too uncertain and unstable and risky to reach that conclusion. 
 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).33
9
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, the evidence leaves me with
doubt about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. In reaching this conclusion, I
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Indeed, Applicant presented evidence that is
quite favorable. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Having33
done so, I conclude that Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
