1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ADP Case No. 13-00584
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Four out of five of Applicant’s delinquent debts are over three years old. He was
informed of the Government’s concern about his debts in March 2011. Yet, over two
years passed before he took documented action to address any of the debts. His two-
hour session with a financial counselor is insufficient to conclude his debts are being
resolved or under the control. Eligibility for access to a sensitive position is denied.
Statement of the Case
On June 12, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) recommending that Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an automated data
processing (ADP) position be denied based on concerns related to the guideline for
financial considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
 In a memorandum from the Office of the Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and1
Security, dated November 19, 2004, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) is directed to apply
the provisions of the Directive, including Enclosure 2, the adjudicative guidelines, in making trustworthiness
determinations, 
2
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  1
Applicant furnished his notarized answer to the SOR on September 8, 2013. A
copy of the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), the Government’s
evidence in support of the allegations of the SOR, was sent to Applicant on September
23, 2013. In an attachment to the FORM, Applicant was advised he could object to the
information in the FORM or submit additional information in explanation, mitigation, or
extenuation. He received the FORM on October 3, 2013. He provided a response on
October 23, 2013, and a supplementary response on November 6, 2013. The
Government did not object to Applicant’s responses to the FORM. The case was
assigned to me on November 18, 2013. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains five allegations related to the financial considerations
guideline. Applicant admitted owing the delinquent accounts. The total amount of
delinquent debt when the SOR was published in June 2013 was $85,453.
Applicant is 57 years old and single. He served in the United States Air Force
(USAF) from November 1975 to November 1979. He also served in the United States
Navy (USN) from May 1980 to May 1981. Since July 2010, he has been employed as a
beneficiary service representative. He received his first security clearance in 1975.
According to credit agency reports dated September 28, 2010, and April 11,
2013, and Applicant’s OPM interview, his financial problems began in about June 2008
when he moved overseas to operate a pizza business. No additional information was
provided to explain why he left his job as billing manager where he had been employed
since March 2003. After his departure, a $14,285 equity line of credit identified at SOR
1.b was charged off in July 2008. A mortgage deficiency balance of $60,000 identified at
SOR 1.d became delinquent in February 2009, when Applicant could not keep his
house in the United States consistently rented with two renters to cover the mortgage.
He indicated that he convinced the lender to foreclose on the property in April 2011 to
evict a problem tenant. He intended to remortgage the property and lease to new
tenants. (Item 8) 
A telecommunications account identified at SOR 1.a, totaling $383, became
delinquent in November 2009. A second telecommunications account identified at SOR
1.e, totaling $785, became delinquent in August 2010. Applicant told the OPM
interviewer in March 2011 that he was unable to resolve the two telecommunications
accounts before moving overseas in June 2008. He informed the interviewer of his
3
intention to contact the two creditors of the telecommunication accounts and pay the
debts. A collection account of $10,000, identified at SOR 1.c, became delinquent in
August 2012. (Item 2, credit report dated June 28, 2013; Items 6, 7, 8)
In his OPM interview in March 2011, Applicant indicated he did not make much of
a profit from the pizza business between June 2008 and July 2010, when he began
working for his current employer. At the time of the OPM interview, Applicant, still the
owner of the pizza business, was earning a good profit even though he was working
part-time. He did not disclose his pizza earnings in his April 2013 personal financial
statement. In explaining why it took him time to pay the listed delinquent debts, he
indicated that he is paid in American dollars, but must meet his expenses in euros. The
fluctuating exchange rate results in lost income and less money available to pay debts.
(Items 8, 9)
Between June 2008 and early 2013, Applicant submitted no documentation of
action to address the delinquent accounts listed in the SOR. An April 2013 credit bureau
report discloses that he apparently filed an official dispute of a collection account
identified in SOR 1.c. (Item 7) In April 2013, he denied the SOR 1.c collection account
belonged to him. (Item 9)
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation dated July 16,
2013, of a $200 settlement of the telecommunications account identified at SOR 1.a.
Regarding the line of credit account identified in SOR 1.b, in his October 2013 response
to the FORM, Applicant reiterated his claim made in July 2013, that he had reached an
agreement with the creditor to pay $100 a month. No documentation of payments were
furnished. The account remains unpaid.  
On October 10, 2010, Applicant was notified by the collection account holder in
SOR 1.c that he was required to pay $250 by October 31, 2013, and $150 a month
beginning in November 2013. He paid the $250 on October 31, 2013. The balance of
the account remains unpaid. 
Applicant provided documentation dated July 11, 2013, verifying that he owes
nothing to the lender identified in SOR 1.d. (Item 2; Response to FORM, July 13, 2013,
letter from lender) Concerning the telecommunications account identified in SOR 1.e,
Applicant claimed in July 2013 that he would pay the account in full by July 26, 2013.
The collection agency (SOR 1.e) informed Applicant on October 8, 2013, that his $450
settlement payment was due on October 18, 2013. He provided documentation
establishing that he settled the delinquent account by credit card on October 23, 2013.
In a supplemental response to the FORM, he provided a $100 payment to a creditor not
listed in the SOR. (Response to FORM)
Character Evidence
In a character statement from the president of Applicant’s employer dated March
19, 2013, she indicated that Applicant has been employed as a beneficiary service
4
representative since July 2010. Based on the comments from his customers and
coworkers, she believes his performance has been exemplary. He is a team player who
has occasionally assisted at other employment sites on the continent. (Item 5)
On July 16, 2013, Applicant met with a financial counselor for two hours. He was
advised to inform one of the credit agencies that he was working overseas and he was
taking steps to pay his collections accounts. The counselor was scheduled to meet him
for a second session two weeks later. No documentation of the follow-up meeting was
submitted.
Applicant considers himself a responsible employee as demonstrated by his
performance evaluations for the past three years. His performance evaluation dated
June 24, 2013, reflects that he “frequently exceeded expectations” based on reliably
and responsibly completing tasks in a timely manner. He was praised for his team-
player attitude. Applicant believes his responsibility is also demonstrated by his
performance with a previous employer as a billing manager for five years. He is aware
of the financial guideline that requires an applicant to live within his means and
responsibly take care of his financial obligations. (Item 2)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions.
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that based on all
available information, the person’s reliability, and trustworthiness in performing sensitive
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security. 
When evaluating an individual’s eligibility for a public trust position, an
administrative judge must apply the provisions of the Directive, including the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The guidelines should be applied in a commonsense
manner, in the context of the nine general factors of the whole-person concept. 
In addition to the AG, the Directive outlines procedures that must be followed in a
trustworthiness decision. The Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts proven the
evidence admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel. The applicant has
the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish his or her eligibility for a public trust
position. Any doubt about the applicant’s eligibility must be resolved in favor of national
security. 
Analysis
Financial Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set forth in AG ¶ 18:
5
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
There are two pertinent disqualifying conditions that are potentially applicable:
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations). Applicant moved overseas in June 2008. Then, five
accounts totaling $85,453, became delinquent by June 2013. Perplexing is the fact that
Applicant took no documented action to address the debts until early 2013, even after
indicating in March 2011, when he was working full-time for his current employer, that
he was earning a good profit from his secondary income as a part-time pizza business
owner. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
Four mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness,
and good judgment); AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances); AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control); and AG ¶ 20(d) (a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts).
Even after the $60,000 mortgage deficiency balance (SOR 1.d) and the two
telecommunications accounts are subtracted from Applicant’s total delinquent debt, he
still owes $24,285, and has furnished insufficient evidence to conclude his indebtedness
will not continue or recur. Applicant provided no explanation for his decision to move
overseas to operate a business after his five-year employment as a billing manager.
Any assumption that I make, i.e., inability to find employment in the United States,
would be based on speculation rather than evidence. Regardless of the reasons for
Applicant’s move, he still had a duty to manage his financial obligations in a responsible
manner. Rather than keeping the creditors informed in the intervening years of his
inability to pay his debts, he did nothing until early 2013, when he initially disputed the
collection account identified at SOR 1.d. While he finally sought financial counseling
after he received the SOR in June 2013, there are no clear indications that Applicant’s
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and
20(c) do not apply. The limited mitigation Applicant receives under AG ¶ 20(d) for
paying two telecommunications accounts and partially paying the collection account
6
identified at SOR 1.c is undermined by Applicant’s stated intention to resolve the two
telecommunication accounts more than two years earlier. 
Whole-Person Concept 
I have examined the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
the financial considerations guideline. I have also weighed the circumstances within the
context of nine variables known as the whole-person concept. In evaluating the
relevance of an individual's conduct, the administrative judge should consider the
following factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a): (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which the participation was
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
As set forth in AG ¶ 2(c), the final trustworthiness decision must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the specific guidelines,
each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person.
Applicant is 57 years old and single. Before his current employment, he worked
as a billing manager for five years and believes he carried out his job duties in a
responsible manner. Since July 2010, he has been employed as a billing service
representative. His current overall performance evaluation frequently meets job element
expectations based on his reliability and responsibility. He finishes projects in a timely
manner and he is a team player. 
The mitigating evidence supporting Applicant’s eligibility for a sensitive position is
insufficient to overcome his history of not meeting financial obligations. He has not
demonstrated the same characteristics of reliability and responsibility in managing his
financial obligations that he has in executing his job responsibilities over the years. His
March 2011 OPM interview establishes that he was aware of most of the listed accounts
when he accepted ownership of a pizza operation overseas in June 2008. Significantly,
he informed the interviewer that he would attempt to contact the two telecommunication
creditors and pay the debts. Applicant, who had been working full-time for his current
employer since July 2010, also told the interviewer that he was finally earning a good
profit from his pizza business. Yet, more than two more years passed before he took
documented action to address the listed debts.
In April 2013, Applicant disclosed for the first time that the negative exchange
rate between the American dollar and the euro reduced the amount of available income
to pay the listed debts. However, the profit that Applicant was earning from his pizza
operation, which he did not disclose in his March 2011 PFS, should have been available
to augment whatever shortfall the negative exchange rate created. Judging by the
totality of the evidence, I do not find Applicant’s claim credible. Given his delay in
7
addressing his indebtedness until after he received the SOR in June 2013, and the lack
of a meaningful track record of payments to satisfy the delinquent debts, I am unable to
conclude that he has his financial obligations under control. Having weighed and
balanced the cited disqualifying and mitigating conditions with the nine factors of the
whole-person concept, Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness security
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through
AG ¶ 2(a)(9).
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is denied. 
                      
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
