 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 13-00622 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s spouse is close to her father and mother, who are residents and 
citizens of Pakistan. She has frequent contact with her parents. Applicant’s father-in-law 
was a high-level Pakistan Government official. He turned in his Pakistani National 
Identity Card (NIC) to his employer. Although foreign preference concerns are mitigated, 
foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 18, 2012, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On August 9, 
2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) and C (foreign 
preference) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005.  
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
Government, DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On September 4, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On October 16, 
2013, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On October 21, 2013, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. On November 4, 2013, DOHA sent notice of the hearing, 
setting the hearing on November 25, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled. I 
received the transcript of the hearing on December 3, 2013.     
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits, and Applicant offered 
six exhibits. (Tr. 18-22, 27-29; GE 1-2; AE A-F) Applicant objected to information in GE 
1 and 2 alleging that he had ongoing contacts with the former Pakistan Government 
employees in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.k. (Tr. 19-22; GE 1-2) His father-in-law is retired from 
Pakistan Government service, elderly, and in poor health. (Tr. 21) I overruled 
Applicant’s objection and admitted Department Counsel’s documents into evidence; 
however, I advised Applicant that he could present evidence about his current 
connections to Pakistan to reduce the weight to be accorded to the information in the 
documents. (GE 1-2; Tr. 22) Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s exhibits, 
and I admitted them into evidence. (Tr. 28-29; AE A-F)  
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Pakistan. (Tr. 22; AN Request) Department Counsel provided supporting documents to 
show detail and context for those facts. (AN Request) Applicant objected because his 
current connections with Pakistan are limited; his connections to the United States are 
substantial; his contributions to the United States are significant; and he has good law-
abiding character and integrity. (Tr. 24-26) There was no objection about the accuracy 
of the AN materials, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 24-26) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.l, and he 
provided mitigating information. (HE 3) He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old linguist, who seeks employment requiring a security 
clearance. (Tr. 6; AE A-F) He was born in Pakistan, and his father died when he was 
four years old. (Tr. 29) In 1979, he graduated from high school, and in 1984, he 
graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree from a college run by the Pakistan 
Government. (Tr. 7-8, 30)  
 
In 1992, Applicant married. (Tr. 44, 52) In 1999, Applicant, his spouse, and two 
children entered the United States from Pakistan. (Tr. 20, 23-24, 40) In 2000, he 
claimed political asylum in the United States. (Tr. 40) He has a son, who is currently 
attending college in the United States, and he has an 18-year-old daughter, who lives in 
the United States. (Tr. 24)  
 
In December 2006, Applicant visited Pakistan for about 10 days with his spouse 
and children because his mother-in-law was ill. (Tr. 44-45) This was Applicant’s only trip 
to Pakistan after leaving in 1999. (Tr. 45-46) In 2009, his spouse traveled to Pakistan for 
a wedding. (Tr. 46)  In January 2011, Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. (GE 1 
at 7) His spouse and children were also naturalized as U.S. citizens. (Tr. 46; GE 1) 
 
Applicant’s mother is a U.S. citizen and resident. (Tr. 52) Applicant has two 
brothers. (Tr. 52) One brother is a permanent resident of the United States, and the 
other brother is an Australian citizen. (Tr. 52-54) 
 
Applicant has three sisters. (Tr. 55) One is a U.S. citizen, and two are U.S. 
permanent residents. (Tr. 55-56) All of his siblings reside in either the United States or 
Australia. Three of his siblings are either married to U.S. citizens or U.S. permanent 
residents. (Tr. 55-57) He has numerous nieces and nephews that are either U.S. 
citizens or U.S. permanent residents. (Tr. 55-57)    
  
For several years after arriving in the United States, Applicant was a travel agent. 
(Tr. 48, 71) In June 2012, he began his current employment as a linguist. (Tr. 49) In 
January 2013, he was deployed to Afghanistan. (Tr. 50) In about May 2013, he returned 
to the United States. (Tr. 51) He currently manages a restaurant or lounge. (Tr. 51) 
 
                                            
1To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. At Applicant’s request and with the concurrence of Department 
Counsel, Applicant’s opening statement and comments during his discussion about admissibility of 
evidence were accepted as substantive evidence. (Tr. 26)  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant served in the Pakistan military for 16 years and prematurely retired as 
an officer in 1995, because of lack of additional promotion opportunities. (Tr. 31, 35, 44) 
While in the Pakistan military, he had substantial responsibility, was assigned to a 
combat zone, held a Pakistan security clearance, and was involved in dangerous duties 
involving suppression of terrorists and criminals. (Tr. 24, 32, 41-43; SOR ¶ 1.l; SOR 
response) Upon retirement from the Pakistan military, he received a lump-sum 
severance from the Pakistan Government. (Tr. 68) He is not receiving a monthly 
retirement pension from Pakistan. (Tr. 68) He is not entitled to receive a retirement or 
old age pension from the Pakistan Government. (Tr. 69) From 1995 to 1999, he worked 
in the private sector providing security in Pakistan. (Tr. 36) After he retired from 
Pakistan Government service, he was worried that dangerous persons might retaliate 
against him for his military service. (Tr. 24) 
 
When Applicant was growing up in Pakistan, he lived with his uncle, who 
currently lives in Pakistan. (Tr. 30) Applicant‘s uncle had a stroke, and Applicant rarely 
communicates with him. (Tr. 30) 
 
Applicant has a friend since childhood, who is a retired Pakistani military officer. 
(SOR ¶ 1.j) He has not spoken to him for two years. (Tr. 21, 37-38; GE 2 at 16) He has 
three friends who were Pakistani officers and now they are U.S. citizens, living in the 
United States. (Tr. 38-40; SOR ¶ 1.k) 
 
Applicant’s spouse has one sister and two brothers. One sister and one brother 
live in Pakistan and are Pakistani citizens. (Tr. 61-65; SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d) They are 
married to Pakistani citizens and residents. (Tr. 61-62) Applicant’s communications with 
his spouse’s siblings are less frequent than about every six months. (GE 2) One 
brother, who is married to a Pakistani citizen, lives in the United States. (Tr. 64; SOR ¶¶ 
1.g and 1.h) Although Applicant’s spouse communicates with her siblings in Pakistan, 
Applicant did not specify the frequency of those communications. (Tr. 61-65) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan. (Tr. 57, 60; SOR ¶ 1.a) His father-in-law held a high-level Pakistan security 
clearance, and before retiring, held an extremely sensitive and influential Pakistan 
Government position. (Tr. 20, 57, 70) He retired from this position about 20 years ago. 
(Tr. 20-21, 57-58) He is in his late 70s. (Tr. 20-21, 58) Although Applicant indicated in 
June 2012 that he communicated with his mother-in-law and father-in-law about once a 
month, he now communicates with his father-in-law about once every six months. (Tr. 
59; GE 2) His spouse communicates with her parents every day or every two days. (Tr. 
60, 69) He does not discuss his employment with his father-in-law. (Tr. 20)  
 
 Applicant does not have any property or bank accounts in Pakistan. (Tr. 65) He is 
willing to serve as a linguist in very dangerous situations, such as with U.S. Army 
special forces in Afghanistan, and he is a loyal and faithful U.S. citizen. (Tr. 26)   
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Foreign Preference 
 
In 2007, Applicant was issued a Pakistani NIC, which did not expire until 2016. 
(Tr. 47; SOR ¶ 2.a) He returned his Pakistani NIC and Pakistani passports to his 
employer. (Tr. 47; SOR response) He also renounced his Pakistan citizenship. (Tr. 47) 
He said all of his loyalties are with the United States. (Tr. 72)  
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from power 
in Pakistan. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
(Kpk), and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Pakistan.  
 
The Taliban, Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT), the Haqqani Network, and al Qaida operate 
in Pakistan, and in some instances elements of the Pakistan Government may be 
covertly aiding these terrorist or anti-U.S. entities. Taliban financing has been traced 
from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its 
military and technical capabilities. It is likely that in November 2008 LT was responsible 
for the attack in Mumbai, which caused numerous casualties. The Haqqani Network 
attacked the U.S. Embassy in Kabul in September 2011. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Pakistan worsened in 2008, driven in part 
by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide 
vital sanctuary to al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist 
groups. Al Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the 
Afghanistan insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and 
Western interests in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Pakistan Taliban and 
other extremists groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, 
plan and prepare regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and 
obtain equipment and supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of 
destabilizing suicide attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile 
government, military, and western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 
2008 due to such attacks. In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan 
conducted at least 40 suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 
600 Pakistan civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Pakistan Government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail, phones, and electronic messages without the requisite court approval. In addition, 
Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, expand nuclear weapon 
stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery systems. In the aftermath of 
Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United States cut-off military aid to 
Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan became allied with the United States in 
counterterrorism. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border and sent thousands of troops and sustained hundreds of 
casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts and 
demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The United States 
is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and security. In 
2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide Pakistan with $3 
billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning in 2005.    
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special operations personnel raided a large compound in 
Pakistan and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaida. The raid raised concerns 
that the Pakistan Government had knowingly permitted terrorists, militants, and 
insurgents to find safe havens in Pakistan.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant was born and educated in Pakistan. He served in the Pakistan military 
for 16 years. His parents, spouse, siblings, children, and his spouse’s parents, siblings, 
nieces, and nephews were born in Pakistan. Applicant’s father died, and his mother, 
spouse, children, and most of his siblings moved to the United States. None of his 
siblings live in Pakistan. He has limited contacts with his in-laws living in Pakistan. He 
has friends with connections to Pakistan; however, his contacts with them are limited. 
Moreover, Applicant was of relatively low rank in the Pakistan military, and he left active 
duty in 1995. He is not receiving on-going pension payments from the Pakistan 
Government. None of the disqualifying conditions apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.l, and these 
SOR paragraphs are mitigated. 
 
AG ¶ 7(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Applicant lives with his spouse in the 
United States. His spouse is close to her father and mother, who are residents and 
citizens of Pakistan. She communicates with her parents almost every day. She 
traveled to Pakistan when her mother was sick. Her father was a high-level Pakistan 
Government official, who held a security clearance and had access to very sensitive 
material.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and 
obligation to his spouse. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there 
is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d). Although Applicant has limited contacts to his in-
laws living in Pakistan, he has affection for his spouse, and she has affection for her 
family living in Pakistan. So an indirect, but important tie remains between Applicant and 
his in-laws living in Pakistan. 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Indirect influence from Applicant’s in-laws living in Pakistan, through Applicant’s 
spouse to Applicant, could result in a security concern. Applicant’s spouse’s 
communications with her siblings living in Pakistan are not fully described in the record, 
and there is insufficient evidence to establish a security concern in regard to her 
siblings; however, her relationships with her parents living in Pakistan are sufficient to 
create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” Her relationships with residents of Pakistan create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help his spouse and her parents, who are in Pakistan. For example, if terrorists in 
Pakistan wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on his in-
laws in Pakistan. Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through his 
spouse and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
Applicant’s spouse’s possession of close family ties with her parents living in a 
dangerous country, such as Pakistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if an applicant or their spouse has a close relationship with even 
one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the 
potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his spouse’s 
relationships with her family members living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his spouse’s parents living in 
Pakistan, which is a dangerous country for anyone with a close link to the U.S. 
Government and classified material.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his 
spouse, or his in-laws living in Pakistan, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such 
a possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Pakistan has a 
significant problem with terrorism. Applicant’s spouse’s relationship with family 
members living in Pakistan creates a potential conflict of interest because these 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist 
her family members in Pakistan by providing sensitive or classified information. 
Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s spouse’s contacts 
with her family living in Pakistan. Department Counsel has raised the issue of potential 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant’s spouse has frequent 
contact with her parents, who are living in Pakistan. Her loyalty and connections to her 
family living in Pakistan are positive character traits. However, for security clearance 
purposes, those same connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 
and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
spouse’s relationships with her relatives who are Pakistani citizens] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. In 1999, Applicant, his spouse, and two children 
immigrated together to the United States from Pakistan. He has a son, who is currently 
attending college in the United States, and he has an 18-year-old daughter, who lives in 
the United States. He is now 51 years old. Applicant, his spouse, and two children are 
U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. When he took an oath and swore allegiance 
to the United States in 2011, as part of his naturalization as a U.S. citizen, and when he 
volunteered to serve in Afghanistan in a combat zone as a linguist, he manifested his 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other countries.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his spouse’s relationships with her family living in 
Pakistan. She frequently communicates with her family living in Pakistan. There is no 
evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan Government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, his spouse, or their 
family to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.2 As such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant or his spouse’s family living in Pakistan would be 
specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. Of course, the 
primary risk to his family living in Pakistan is from terrorists and other lawless elements 
and not the Pakistan Government. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
                                            
2There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in Pakistan. 
Applicant’s spouse’s family in Pakistan will become potential targets of terrorists 
because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s spouse’s family 
from lawless elements in Pakistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant or his spouse’s involvement with family members living in Pakistan. Applicant 
is not required to report his contacts with citizens or residents of Pakistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because it is only available to mitigate security 
concerns arising under AG ¶ 7(e).3 Applicant does not have investments in Pakistan.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s spouse’s connections to her parents living in Pakistan are 
significant. She is close to her parents and communicates with them almost every day. 
Her father held a high-level position in the Pakistan Government, including access to 
Pakistani classified information. Although Applicant’s connections to the United States 
are strong, they are insufficient to outweigh his connections to his spouse. Under 
Appeal Board jurisprudence, her connections to citizens and residents of Pakistan are 
imputed to Applicant. Her connections to her parents in Pakistan raise an unmitigated 
foreign influence security concern under Guideline B.     
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 10(a) provides, “(a) exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the 
foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession 
of a current foreign passport. . . .” The scope of AG ¶ 10 is not limited to the specifically 
enumerated disqualifying conditions and includes possession of a currently valid 
Pakistani NIC. In 2007, Applicant was issued a Pakistani NIC, which did not expire until 
2016.  He retained the Pakistani NIC after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2011. AG ¶ 10(a) 
applies. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: “(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;” and 
“(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated.” 
                                            
3AG ¶ 7(e) reads, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant did not receive any benefits as a result of holding a NIC after becoming 
a U.S. citizen in 2011. He did not travel to Pakistan after becoming a U.S. citizen. He 
returned his Pakistani NIC and Pakistani passport to his employer before his hearing. 
He also renounced his Pakistan citizenship, and he emphasized all of his loyalties are 
with the United States. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) apply and foreign preference concerns 
are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are less 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed 
any security violations. When he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance 
to the United States. His spouse and two children are U.S. citizens and reside in the 
United States. His mother and most of his siblings live in the United States, and none of 
his immediate family lives in Pakistan. He volunteered to serve as a linguist with U.S. 
forces in Afghanistan. There is no evidence that terrorists or other foreign elements 
have specifically targeted Applicant since a U.S. Government contractor began 
employing him in 2012.   
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Pakistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.4 Pakistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from terrorists and other lawless elements. Terrorists continue to threaten the 
Pakistan Government, the interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
assist the United States. The Pakistan Government does not fully comply with the rule 
of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States and Pakistan 
Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. Pakistan and the United States have 
close relationships in diplomacy and trade. Pakistan and the United States have 
sometimes had profound policy disputes.     
 
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s spouse’s 
parents living in Pakistan that warrant greater weight than his connections to the United 
States. Applicant’s spouse’s father and mother are Pakistan citizens and live in 
Pakistan. She frequently communicates with her father and mother. Her father was a 
high-level Pakistan Government official with access to sensitive Pakistan Government 
secrets. Although her father is elderly and ill, there was no persuasive evidence 
presented that he has ended all of his connections to the Pakistan Government. Her 
close connections to her family in Pakistan make Applicant more vulnerable as a target 
of coercion by lawless elements in Pakistan. Her family in Pakistan will be at a greater 
risk if his clearance is granted.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Although foreign preference concerns 
are mitigated, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden and foreign influence 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
