                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 13-00370
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 13, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on March 11, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On April 30, 2013, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DoD could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on May 13, 2013, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on September 11, 2013.  The Applicant received the FORM on September
25, 2013.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or
mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  The Applicant failed to submit a reply to the FORM.
This case was assigned to the undersigned on November 26, 2013.  Based upon a
review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 58 years old and married.  He is employed with a defense
contractor as a Proposal Analyst and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in
connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted each of the twelve delinquent debts set forth in the SOR
under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR).  Credit Reports of the Applicant
dated July 15, 2013; March 4, 2013; and March 22, 2011, reflect that the Applicant is
indebted to each of these creditors in an amount totaling at least $40,000.  (Government
Exhibits 6, 7 and 8.)  Most of the debts are delinquent credit card accounts.  Applicant
has been working for his current employer since January 1982.
Applicant attributes his financial indebtedness to events beyond his control.  His
mother passed away, his wife lost her job, and his son moved out.  He indicated that
each of these individuals had been contributing to the household income, and when the
loss of these three incomes occurred, it made it impossible for him to pay the bills.
(Government Exhibit 5.)  Applicant did not provide any supporting documentation to
substantiate these events or situation.
Applicant claims that he has settled four of the twelve delinquent debts.  He
asserts that allegation 1(a)., a judgment filed in September 2010 in the amount of
$11,086 has been paid.  However, he submitted a copy of the unpaid judgment as
supporting evidence.  There is no evidence of any payments made to resolve this debt.
This falls short of proving the debt has been resolved.  Furthermore, Government
Exhibit 6, also reflects that it remains unpaid.  I find this debt to remain owing.  
Applicant also asserts that allegation 1(b)., a debt in the amount of $7,301 has
been paid.  However, as proof of payment, he submitted a copy of the purported
settlement check written from his daughter’s checking account and not his own.  He
provided no other documentary evidence of contacts or payments between October
2009 and the date of payment in April 2013.  Since it is possible that he  borrowed
money from his daughter or that she may have owed him money, I find this debt to be
resolved.
Allegation 1.(h)., a debt in the amount of $107 has been paid.  Applicant
submitted a document indicating that the debt was paid on May 6, 2013.  (Government
Exhibit 2.)  Allegation 1(j)., a debt in the amount of $10,625 has been paid.  Applicant
3
submitted a letter from the creditor indicating that the debt was settled in March 2011.
(Government Exhibit 2.)  As indicated above, I find that only three of the four debts he
claims have been paid were resolved.  Allegation 1(a) remains outstanding.       
 The following eight delinquent debts remain owing and unpaid.  According to
Government Exhibit 6 the account set forth in allegation 1(a)., has been delinquent
since at least May 2012 and remains unpaid. Allegation 1(c)., a debt for an account in
the amount of $2,199 remains outstanding.  Government Exhibit 6 reflects two
delinquent debts and an unpaid judgment owed to the creditor.  Allegation 1(d)., a debt
owed to a creditor in the amount of  $1,126 is outstanding.  Allegation 1(e)., a debt
owed to a creditor in the amount of $597 is outstanding.  Allegation 1(f)., a debt owed to
a creditor in the amount of $1,074 is outstanding.  Allegation 1(g)., a debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $1,037 is outstanding.  Allegation 1(i)., a debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $2,103 is outstanding.  Allegation 1(k)., a debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $2,102 is outstanding.  Allegation 1(l)., a debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $795 is outstanding.  There is no documentary evidence of any
payments made to resolve the above debts.      
Applicant provided no documentary evidence concerning the quality of his
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures.
He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability.  I was unable to evaluate his credibility,
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a
hearing.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
4
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
5
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  The evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
There is little evidence in the record that shows that the Applicant has resolved
his excessive indebtedness.  Only three of his debts have been resolved, the other nine
remain outstanding and excessive.  There is no evidence of any payment plans being
established or any other attempts to resolve his debts.  Although his statement to the
investigator during his security clearance background investigation confirmed that he
would be working to resolve his debts, there is no evidence of the sort.  Presently, he
remains excessively indebted and his financial situation remains dismal.           
                     
The Applicant has done little to show that he is fiscally responsible.  It does not
appear that he understands the importance of paying his bills on time or it may possibly
be that he simply does not have the financial resources to address his debts.  In any
case, there is insufficient evidence of financial rehabilitation.  The Applicant has not
demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs or that he is fiscally
responsible. 
Under the particular circumstances of this case, the Applicant has not met his
burden of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  It cannot be said that he
has made a good-faith effort to resolve his past-due indebtedness.  He has not shown
6
that he is or has been reasonably, responsibly or prudently addressing his financial
situation.  Assuming that he begins to work to resolve his debts, and then shows that he
has not acquired any new debt that he is unable to pay, he may be eligible for a security
clearance in the future.  However, not at this time.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  None of the Mitigation Conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not
overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant
        Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.h.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j.: For the Applicant
    Subpara.  1.k.: Against the Applicant
        Subpara.  1.l.: Against the Applicant.
7
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
