 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-12001 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from the unintended breach of 
his employment agreement with his former employer. This single lapse in judgment 
occurred over 18 months ago and is wholly uncharacteristic of Applicant’s over 17 years 
of service to the nation. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for a security 
clearance (Answer). 
 
On September 5, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case. After coordinating with 
the parties, I scheduled the hearing for October 23, 2013. At hearing, Government 
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 9 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A through E were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and called several character references 
as witnesses. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on October 29, 2013. 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 43, is married, and has two children. He was raised in a military family 
and was in the Reserved Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) throughout college. He 
graduated from college in 1992, and was commissioned as an officer in the U.S. Navy. 
He served in the Navy from 1992 to 2000. During his eight years in the Navy, Applicant 
was deployed to sea for 55 months and was selected for a prestigious assignment in 
support of the Office of the President. This later assignment resulted in Applicant being 
investigated for and granted a Top Secret clearance. Applicant’s military fitness reports 
reflect favorably on his duty performance. Upon voluntarily resigning his commission, 
Applicant received an honorable discharge. In 2004, he was hired by his former 
employer, Company A, a large DoD contractor. (Tr. at 54-58, 97; Gx. 1; Ax. C) 
 
Applicant worked for Company A from November 2004 to April 2012. (Tr. at 94, 
98; Gx. 9) Prior to starting his job with Company A, Applicant signed an employment 
agreement, wherein he agreed to certain fiduciary duties, “including, the duty to place 
the interests of Company A and its shareholders above [his] own personal interest in 
any case where they might conflict.” (Gx. 2 at 2). The agreement also included a non-
compete provision, which provided, in pertinent part, that Applicant would “not directly or 
indirectly sell, market or otherwise provide goods or services to any [Company A] 
Clients in competition with [Company A].” (Gx. 2 at 3) Company A reinforced these 
agreements through internal corporate policies and yearly refresher training. (Tr. at 107-
108; Gx. 3 – 4) 
 
In May 2011, Applicant was promoted by Company A and was part of a two-
person office overseeing an information technology (IT) systems support services 
contract for Agency X (original contract). This original contract was set to expire on 
September 30, 2012, and the Government requested bids from contractors for a 
replacement contract. The replacement contract would include providing IT systems 
support services to Agency X and Agency Y, starting June 1, 2013. Even though the 
original and replacement contract would have overlapping performance periods, 
Company A was unable to bid on the replacement contract outright because it had been 
set aside for a small business. Company A teamed with another company to win the 
replacement contract. (Tr. at 58-67, 72-76, 97-99) 
 
In about January 2012, the Government selected Company A and two other 
contractors as finalist for the replacement contract. In approximately March 2012, one of 
the other finalists, Company B, reached out to Applicant and offered him a job. The job 
was contingent upon Company B winning the replacement contract. Applicant accepted 
the contingent employment offer with Company B. He did not provide Company B any 
information or help it in its efforts to win the replacement contract. He did not inform 
Company A that he had accepted the contingent employment offer with Company B, as 
required by Company A’s internal corporate policies and procedures. (Tr. at 66-72, 101-
104; Gx. 4) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant continued working for Company A and was fully committed to its efforts 
to win the replacement contract. Applicant explained that he wanted to stay with 
Company A, because he had spent several years with the company and had 
accumulated a substantial amount of benefits that he would forfeit if he had to switch 
employers. Also, he had made several professional contacts within the company and its 
large size held out the prospect for future job opportunities. (Tr. at 101-104) Applicant 
was also in line to receive a “high level, lead position” if Company A’s bid was selected 
by the Government. (Ax. E.3)  
 
A former co-worker writes that Applicant worked “many nights and weekends 
over a three month period in an effort to shore up [Company A’s] bid.” (Ax. E.3) 
Applicant’s performance evaluations from Company A reflect that he was rated as either 
exceeding expectations or as a superior performer. (Ax. B.1 – B.8) Applicant’s 
“outstanding professional performance” and “valuable contributions” in support of DoD 
were recognized by Company A. (Ax. B.10)  
 
 Notwithstanding Applicant and his former co-workers best efforts, in April 2012, 
Company B was awarded the replacement contract by the Government. The day after 
Company B was awarded the replacement contract, Applicant was asked to attend a 
meeting with the Government as a Company B representative. The meeting involved 
the transition from Company A to Company B. Applicant agreed to go to the meeting, 
because he believed the two companies were no longer in competition, as Company B 
had been awarded the replacement contract. However, in order to avoid the 
Government being charged for his time at the meeting, Applicant took a day of leave 
from Company A. He clearly identified himself at the meeting as representative of 
Company B. He did not receive pay from Company B for his attendance at the meeting. 
Applicant’s supervisors at Company A became aware of his attendance at the meeting 
and immediately removed him from the original contract. Realizing that he would likely 
be terminated, Applicant submitted his resignation to Company A. (Tr. at 72, 79-83, 85, 
99-100, 104-107; Gx. 9; Ax. A) 
 
Applicant began working for Company B in May 2013. He started performing 
work in support of the replacement contract in June 2012. His work, however, was 
limited to providing IT systems support to Agency Y. He did not provide any IT systems 
support to Agency X until October 2012, after the original contract with Company A 
ended. He worked for Company B until January 2013, when he was laid off due to a 
reduction in force. (Tr. at 75-79, 87, 91-94) 
 
In May 2012, Applicant received a letter from Company A’s deputy general 
counsel, claiming that his attendance at the April 2013 meeting on behalf of Company B 
was a violation of his employment contract with Company A. The letter states that “you 
violated both your fiduciary duty to put the interests of Company A above your personal 
interest as well as your obligation not to compete against [Company A] while an 
employee.” (Ax. B.12 at 1) The letter goes on to state that “it is the Company’s practice 
to enforce the narrowly-drafted restrictions contained” in the employment agreement. 
(Ax. B.12 at 2) Applicant, provided the letter and the employment agreement to a friend, 
 
4 
 
 
who is an attorney with over 15 years of civil law experience and was recently selected 
for a civil court judgeship. Applicant’s friend reviewed the letter and employment 
agreement, and advised Applicant that he had not violated the non-compete agreement. 
Applicant’s friend testified and maintained his opinion that there was no violation of the 
non-compete agreement. (Tr. at 31-43, 73, 109; Ax. E.2) Company A has not filed suit 
against Applicant for violation of any of the terms of the employment agreement. It did 
file an adverse information report, claiming that Applicant had committed a security 
violation, which led to the current action. (Tr. at 83-86, 109; Gx. 6)  
 
Despite the unfavorable circumstances following his resignation from Company 
A, Applicant did not attempt to harm or besmirch his former employer. Instead, when 
asked by the Government whether Company A was entitled to payment for bills it was 
submitting for the work they had completed under the original contract, Applicant 
supported payment for the completed work. He takes full responsibility for his conduct 
that led to the current security clearance review. (Tr. at 88-96, 107) 
 
 Applicant began working for another federal contractor in about March 2013. He 
is currently working on an IT services contract not related to his prior work with either 
Company A or B. Applicant told his current employer of the situation involving Company 
A and the potential impact to his security clearance. (Tr. at 87-88, 94-95, 104, 106) 
Notwithstanding this adverse information, Applicant’s current employer still hired him. 
His current employer states that Applicant candidly admits he “made a grave error in 
judgment by appearing as a representative of one company before he resigned from the 
other.” (Ax. E.7) His current employer sees the incident “as an isolated aberration and 
the type of thing from which [Applicant] has learned and grown greatly.” (Ax. E.7) 
Applicant’s employer goes on to state “I have no concerns whatsoever that he 
[Applicant] would ever do anything of the sort in the future and strongly recommend that 
he retain his security clearance.” (Ax. E.7; Tr. at 17-28) A number of current and former 
co-workers, as well as family and long-time friends, testified and submitted letters 
attesting to Applicant’s honesty, reliability, and integrity, and recounted details of his 
extensive community involvement. (Ax. E.1 – E.6; Tr. at 17-52) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
5 
 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.1  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.2 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
                                                          
1 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises 
regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
2 See generally Kaplan v. Conyers, et al., 2013 U.S. App. LEXIS 17278 at ** 23-24, 40-51 (Fed. 
Cir. Aug. 20, 2013) (federal courts will generally defer to the predictive judgments made by executive 
branch officials responsible for determining the eligibility of an applicant for a security clearance).  
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant breached his employment agreement with Company A by accepting 
the contingent employment offer and attending the April 2012 meeting. Applicant’s 
conduct was, at a minimum, a violation of his fiduciary duties to Company A, which he 
agreed to in his employment agreement. Applicant compounded the situation by not 
informing his supervisors at Company A that he accepted the contingent employment 
offer from Company B. Applicant’s lack of candor and then showing up at a meeting as 
a representative of the winning company just a day after the replacement contract was 
awarded, lead his former employer to suspect that Applicant may have undermined their 
ability to win the replacement contract.  
 
 Applicant’s violation of his employment agreement with Company A took place at 
a tumultuous time, when the contract he had been working on for years was being 
rebid. Such a situation is a common scenario for many federal contractors who may 
work at the same job for several years, if not an entire career, but have several different 
employers. Yet, Applicant’s conduct is not mitigated by the fluidity of his employment 
situation. The Government expects that individuals granted access to classified 
information will demonstrate good judgment and comply with rules and regulations, 
including during periods of instability. An individual’s failure to do so raises the 
possibility that they may disregard rules and regulations regarding the proper handling 
of classified information or may exhibit poor judgment in safeguarding the same. 
Moreover, an individual who is willing to betray their employer’s trust and confidence to 
benefit a competitor who has offered them a job may similarly betray the confidences of 
the United States. Thus, Applicant’s conduct and the appearance of a conflict of interest 
raises the concern of Guideline E, and establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 
16(d)3 and 16(f).4 
 
 Applicant’s lapse in judgment was a one-time event that occurred 18 months 
ago. He honestly did not believe his attendance at the April 2012 meeting constituted a 
breach of his employment agreement with Company A, because in his view they were 
no longer in competition for the replacement contract. He recognizes now that he should 
have either resigned form Company A before attending the meeting or simply declined 
to attend the meeting. He also acknowledges that he should have been upfront with his 
former employer about accepting the contingent employment offer from Company B.  
 
 In contrast to this one-time lapse in judgment, Applicant has a long history of 
responsible conduct, including over 17 years of properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Since this incident and despite the pressure associated with the 
present security clearance review, Applicant has exhibited the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness expected of those granted access to this nation’s secrets. 
                                                          
3 Credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may 
not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
4 Violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer as a 
condition of employment. 
 
7 
 
 
More importantly, the record evidence clearly established that Applicant did not betray 
his former employer’s confidences or undermine their position to win the replacement 
contract. Applicant provided Company A an earnest effort in what turned out to be a 
failed attempt to win the replacement contract. Applicant established the mitigating 
condition at AG ¶ 17(c).5  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I hereby incorporate the above analysis and highlight 
some additional whole-person factors. Applicant never intended to violate his 
employment agreement with Company A. He essentially hedged his bets by accepting 
the conditional employment offer from Company B. He represented Company B on his 
own personal time, and only after they were awarded the contract and his employment 
with Company A was essentially finished. However, his conduct constituted a breach of 
the fiduciary duties he voluntarily accepted when he signed his employment agreement 
with Company A. Furthermore, Applicant created the appearance of a conflict of 
interest. However, the evidence established that Applicant did not undermine Company 
A’s position in the awarding of the replacement contract. Although Applicant’s conduct 
was far from ideal, after examining his entire record, both in the military and as a federal 
contractor, I am firmly convinced that this was a one-time lapse in judgment that will not 
be repeated. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
                                                          
5 The offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
6 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
