 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 12-10817 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 25, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant discharged her debts through Chapter 7 bankruptcies filed in 2006 and 
2015. However, she failed to show she has mitigated the financial concern raised by her 
long history of indebtedness. Evidence shows that despite the discharge of debts 
through Chapter 7 bankruptcy, she continues to spend more than she earns each 
month. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 8, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Item 2.) On February 26, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 18, 2016. (Item 2.) She requested that 
her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On September 19, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 12 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on September 19, 2016, and received by her on 
September 27, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
her receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in a letter dated November 1, 2016. I marked 
her submission Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and it was admitted without objection. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on August 2, 2017. Items 1 through 12 are admitted into 
evidence.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel made a motion in the FORM to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 
1.h in order to conform to the evidence, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17. It reads: 
 
1.h. In July 2015, you filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in the U.S. 
Bankruptcy Court for the [location omitted]. In October 2015, the 
dischargeable debts were discharged. 
 
Applicant expressed no objections to the amendment. She denied this allegation in part, 
and sought to clarify her history of filing bankruptcy in AE A. The motion to amend is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old and married since 2002. She has worked for her current 
employer, a government contractor, since 2001. (Item 3.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was delinquent on five debts in the total amount 
of $29,406. Additionally, she was alleged to have filed: a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition 
in 2006, which was discharged in 2008; a Chapter 13 petition that was converted to 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2014; and a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2015, 
which was discharged in October 2015. (Item 1; FORM.) Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, and 1.d. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. (Item 2; AE A.) 
 
 In 2005 Applicant’s husband lost his job as a truck driver. He was unemployed 
for approximately one year. Additionally, due to financial problems and her husband’s 
infidelity, Applicant separated from her husband for about six months in 2006. (Item 9 at 
2.) As a result, they filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2006, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
The petition for bankruptcy was converted to a Chapter 7 in December 2007. Their 
debts were discharged in April 2008. Applicant estimated $30,000 worth of debt was 
discharged. (Item 8; Item 9 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband was again unemployed for a “few months” in 2011. (Item 9 
at 3.) During that time, they became delinquent on a loan for a truck purchased for her 
husband in June 2008. It was repossessed, and Applicant was liable for the remainder. 
The truck loan was initially through the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 1.a but was acquired 
by the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 1.b.1 The second creditor sought a judgment against 
Applicant after she and her husband defaulted on the loan. As a result of the judgment, 
Applicant’s pay was garnished at $200 per week, “leaving Applicant only $100 in her 
paycheck.” (Item 9 at 3.) Applicant and her husband sought relief by filling a joint 
petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in February 2012, as alleged in in SOR ¶ 1.d. They 
paid $15,006 to the trustee during their Chapter 13, and $11,158 was distributed to their 
creditors. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7; Item 12.) Applicant’s joint Chapter 13 was converted 
into a Chapter 7 in 2014. As a letter from Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney explains, it 
was given a separate case number in July 2015 when she chose to file individually 
instead of jointly with her husband. The 2015 Chapter 7 filing (alleged in in SOR ¶1.h) 
stems from the same initial filing in 2012. (AE A; Item 7.)  
 
 Applicant’s 2015 Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition identified $33,224 in total 
liabilities including: the remainder owed on the repossessed truck discussed above 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b); two accounts owed to a bank (alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f); 
and a delinquent cell phone debt owed to a service provider in the amount of $426 
(alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g.). These debts were discharged in October 2015. (Item 11; Item 
12; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing reflects that she has a net income of 
$2,632 monthly. Her monthly expenses are $4,494. She has a negative net monthly 
income of $1,861. (Item 12.) No character references were submitted to describe 
Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate 
                                                 
1 SOR ¶ 1.a and ¶ 1.b are alleged to be owed to different creditors, in different amounts. However, 
Applicant credibly avers that they are the same debt. Further, the credit reports reflect that these debts 
were both automobile loans opened in June 2008. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 12.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
her credibility, demeanor, or character since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15, states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
 
 
5 
 
 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes one condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s credit reports and bankruptcy filings demonstrate significant, and 
constant indebtedness since 2006, despite receiving a discharge of debts in April 2008. 
The facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s SOR-
alleged financial problems have been ongoing since 2006. Further, her bankruptcy 
petition reflects that she continues to spend $1,861 per month more than she makes. 
 
The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s 
husband’s unemployment in 2005 to 2006, and 2011; and their marital separation in 
2006, were beyond her control. However, she did not provide evidence that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances with respect to her debt, which is necessary for full 
mitigation under this condition. She continues to spend substantially more than she 
makes, despite the discharge of more than $63,000 of her previous debts through 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2008 and 2015. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully 
applicable. 
 
Applicant has not established a history of “adhering to a good-faith effort” to 
resolve her delinquent debts. While she twice exercised her ability to legally discharge 
her debts, she continues to spend much more than she earns. The evidence does not 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to her financial 
difficulties. She failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or 
 
 
7 
 
 
permanent behavioral change, concerning her continuing pattern of financial 
irresponsibility. Her ongoing delinquent debts and excessive spending establish 
continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that she did not meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
her financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant2 
  Subparagraphs 1.b through1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
2 SOR ¶ 1.a is found for Applicant to avoid duplicating findings concerning the truck loan in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
