 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06234 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 19, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. After coordinating with the 
parties, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 28, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 5, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 18, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Venezuela. The request was not admitted in evidence but was included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Neither party objected, and I have taken administrative 
notice of the facts contained in HE I. The facts are summarized in the written request 
and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is that Venezuela 
has a repressive, authoritarian, anti-American regime with ties to countries that are 
opposed to the United States. Venezuela maintained a permissive environment that 
allowed for support of activities that benefitted known terrorist groups. Violent crime, 
drug trafficking, and human-rights abuses are prevalent.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He 
worked for another defense contractor from 2003 until he accepted his current position 
in 2007. He has held a security clearance since he worked for the first company. He has 
a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He is married with two children.1 
  
 Applicant’s parents are from Venezuela. They were attending college in the 
United States when Applicant was born, making him a native-born U.S. citizen. His 
parents returned to Venezuela, and Applicant spent much of his childhood there. He did 
not like the direction Venezuela was heading, and he moved back to the United States 
in 2001. He relinquished his Venezuelan passport in 2005, and he has never renewed 
it.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife is from Venezuela. They met in the late 1990s. She immigrated 
to the United States in 2007, and they married in the United States the same year. She 
became a U.S. citizen in 2010. Their children were born in the United States.3 
 
 Applicant’s parents are divorced. His father, stepmother, sibling, and half-siblings 
are U.S. citizens. Applicant’s mother and one of his wife’s siblings are Venezuelan 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21, 24; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 38-39; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 22-24, 39; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
citizens and U.S. permanent residents. His grandmother, parents-in-law, and two of his 
wife’s siblings are Venezuelan citizens and residents.4 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law have been separated for years, but 
have never divorced. His father-in-law lives with and has children with a woman not 
Applicant’s mother-in-law. His father-in-law retired from the Venezuelan military as a 
senior officer. He worked in a government agency for a period after he retired. Applicant 
thinks his father-in-law is unemployed but looking for a job. He believes that his father-
in-law supported the Venezuelan government, but Applicant does not believe his father-
in-law is corrupt because he is not wealthy.5 
 
 Applicant’s wife and her mother are close. Applicant and his wife pay for her 
mother to periodically visit them in the United States. Applicant’s wife is not close to her 
father or her half-siblings. Applicant believes his wife and her father talk or e-mail about 
twice a year. Applicant’s father-in-law has never visited them in the United States and 
has never seen their children. Applicant can only remember talking to his father-in-law 
once since he got married, when his first child was born. They did not talk after the birth 
of his second child.6 
 
 Applicant and his wife have not returned to Venezuela since 2009. He does not 
intend to return to Venezuela to live or even to visit. All of his financial assets are in the 
United States. Applicant and his wife intend to apply for his wife’s mother to immigrate 
to the United States and then either his wife or his mother-in-law will apply for one of his 
wife’s siblings to immigrate to the United States. Applicant credibly testified that he 
would report any attempt to use his foreign connections against him.7   
 
Applicant submitted letters attesting to his excellent job performance, work ethic, 
dedication, honesty, dependability, trustworthiness, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 32-38, 49, 52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 25, 28, 42-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-28, 31-32, 39-41, 47, 52; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 30-32, 35-37, 40-41, 49-50, 55-57; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
8 AE A-C. 
 
4 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law retired from the Venezuelan military as a senior officer. 
Venezuela has a repressive, authoritarian, anti-American regime; maintained ties to 
countries that are less than friendly to the United States; and created a permissive 
environment that allowed for support of activities that benefitted known terrorist groups. 
Violent crime, drug trafficking, and human-rights abuses are prevalent.  
 
Applicant’s Venezuelan father-in-law creates a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through Applicant’s wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) have 
been raised by the evidence.  
 
 
6 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Venezuela. I also considered the 
nature of the Venezuelan government. Applicant’s grandmother, father-in-law, mother-
in-law, and two siblings-in-law are citizens and residents of Venezuela. Only his father-
in-law, the retired military officer, was alleged as a concern in the SOR. In contrast, 
Applicant’s parents, stepmother, wife, children, sibling, half-siblings, and one of his 
siblings-in-law are in the United States as U.S. citizens or permanent residents.  
 
 Applicant’s wife and her father are not close, likely because he left her mother 
and had children with another woman. Applicant believes they talk or e-mail about twice 
a year. Applicant has even less contact with him, only speaking with him once since he 
got married, when his first child was born. Applicant’s father-in-law has never visited 
them in the United States and has never seen their children.  
 
 Applicant’s ties to Venezuela are outweighed by his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. It has been more than eight years since 
he and his wife have visited Venezuela. His closest family, life, home, assets, and 
professional career are in the United States. He credibly testified that he would report 
any attempt to use his foreign connections against him. I find that it is unlikely Applicant 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United 
States and the interests of Venezuela. There is no conflict of interest, because Applicant 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 
8(a) and 8(b) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen with strong endorsements. He credibly testified 
that he would report any attempt to use his foreign contacts to coerce him to reveal 
classified information. His ties to Venezuela are far outweighed by his deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
