KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding the state does not allow him to place
his state taxes in abeyance. In support of this contention, Applicant cites to IRS publication 3. A
reading of IRS publication 3 reflects that it is directed at the deadlines for filing tax returns with,
or making tax payments to, the IRS (i.e., the Federal Government) and does not address the
granting of extensions for state tax requirements. Also, Applicant testified that the combat zone
“abeyance” applied to his Federal taxes, but not apply to his state taxes. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04724.a1
DATE: 08/18/2017
DATE: August 18, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04724
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 28, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On May 8, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in her findings of
fact and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant has worked overseas in combat zones for the past four years.  In 2012, he retired
from the military after 24 years of service.  He is married and has two adult children and two adult
stepchildren.
The SOR alleged that Applicant owed the Federal Government about $19,000 in taxes for
2007, 2010, 2011, and 2012.  He documented the IRS has placed his Federal tax liability in abeyance
due to his service in a combat zone.  The tax code gives people serving in support of the military in
a combat zone up to 180 days after returning to the United States to file and make payments on
delinquent Federal taxes.  Because he still works in a combat zone, the payment of his prior-year
Federal taxes remains deferred.
The SOR alleged that Applicant owed state taxing authorities about $13,700 for 2010, 2011,
and 2012.  He testified that debt was paid through an installment agreement, but did not provide
documentary proof of the agreement or payments.  He presented a cashiers check payable to the state
taxing authority for about $7,700 and claimed this represented the balance due for the tax years in
question.  He indicated he would provide additional evidence showing this debt was resolved, but
failed to do so.  Unlike the Federal Government, the state does not allow Applicant to place his state
taxes in abeyance.1
Applicant’s wife managed their finances from 2007 to 2014.  She felt overwhelmed
managing the household while he was deployed.  They could not afford their Federal income tax
payments while paying for two children in college.  In 2014, he and his wife hired an accountant to
file their taxes and provide tax advice.        
In 1998, Applicant was denied a security clearance due to financial issues.  He attributed this
to his ex-wife’s overspending while he was deployed.  Records show the denial was also due to
overpayments of housing allowances for which he was counseled.  In 2001, he was granted a
security clearance.  His professional colleagues and friends speak highly of him.  
 
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant exercised poor judgment in prioritizing other expenses over his tax obligations. 
1 The SOR also alleged that Applicant had two other debts that the Judge found in his favor and are not an issue
on appeal.  
He placed his Federal taxes in abeyance while he is serving in a combat zone, but the abeyance does
not apply to his state taxes.  He failed to document that his state tax debt is resolved.  He presented
proof of making one payment of $7,700, but about $6,000 appears to remain unpaid.  His state tax
delinquency is not attributable to circumstances beyond his control, and he has not demonstrated
responsible action.   
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding the state does not allow him to place his
state taxes in abeyance.  In support of this contention, Applicant cites to Appellant’s Exhibit (AE)
L, i.e., Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Publication 3, Armed Forces’ Tax Guide, For use in
preparing 2015 Returns.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.   We do not find Applicant’s
contention persuasive.  A reading of IRS Publication 3 reflects that it is directed at the deadlines for
filing tax returns with, or making tax payments to, the IRS (i.e., the Federal Government) and does
not address the granting of extensions for state tax requirements.  Applicant has failed to produce
any documentation to show that he is entitled to a deferment of his state tax obligation.  To the
contrary, Applicant testified that the combat zone “abeyance” applied to his Federal taxes, but not
to his state taxes.2  From our reading of the record, the Judge’s material findings of a security
concern are based on substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences or conclusions that
could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
  
Applicant argues that the Judge did not consider or properly weigh all relevant evidence. 
He cites to such things as his character evidence, military service, and the actions he has taken to
resolve his financial problems.  Applicant’s arguments are neither sufficient to rebut the presumption
that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record nor enough to show that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-03747 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015).  We give due consideration to the Hearing Office
case that Applicant cited, but it is neither binding precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to
undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id.  Additionally, the Judge complied with the requirements of the
Directive in her whole-person analysis by considering the totality of the evidence in reaching her
decision. 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
2 At page 43 of the transcript, Applicant testified as follows:
[Applicant’s Counsel]: You mention this before, putting taxes in abeyance.  What
does that mean?
Applicant: Not that – 
[Applicant’s Counsel]: And I’m sorry, and is this applicable to state and federal or
just federal?
Applicant: Just federal.
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
