 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05996 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 19, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 10, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 7, 
2016. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. The case was 
assigned to me on July 21, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 1.a, which he denied. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He married in 1991. He has three grown children. He 
retired from the military in 2008. He was employed by different federal contractors from 
2008 to 2014. He was unemployed from November 2014 to September 2015, when he 
began working for his present employer, a federal contractor.2 
 
 In December 2012, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator as 
part of his background investigation. During the interview he told the investigator that his 
financial problems arose because he made a late payment on his mortgage in about 
March 2010, which resulted in a balloon payment and penalties (SOR ¶ 1.a-past due 
$58,984). At that time, he believed the past-due amount on the mortgage was about 
$45,000. He also attributed his financial difficulties to car problems. He said he was 
working with a lawyer to help resolve his financial problems. In his answer, he denied 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and stated the house was foreclosed in December 2012, and he 
had been advised by the creditor’s lawyer that “everything was completed and 
finalized.” In the summer of 2014, he received a bill regarding the mortgage. He 
contacted a lawyer who contacted the creditor’s lawyer. His lawyer informed the other 
party that Applicant had been previously advised that there would be no further action 
on the loan after the foreclosure. Applicant stated in his answer that the original 
mortgage company was taken over by another company and he was forwarding 
information to it concerning this matter. Applicant did not provide any additional 
information regarding the status of this debt, however his December 2015 credit report 
reflects a zero balance on the charged-off loan. This debt is resolved.3 
 
 During the interview, Applicant stated there was no amount past due on his 
second mortgage, and he had been making extra payments and was now caught up. 
Applicant’s second mortgage is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b as charged off ($42,928). In 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated this account became delinquent when he lost 
his job in October 2014. Applicant’s credit report from September 2014 reflects the 
                                                          
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 2, 4, 5, 6.  
 
3 
 
 
account was charged-off for the amount alleged in the SOR and the last activity on the 
account was June 2011. His December 2015 credit report reflects a lesser balance on 
the charged-off account ($35,903). Applicant stated in his answer that he had a 
payment plan with the creditor to pay $200 monthly. He provided no documentary 
evidence to corroborate the plan or payments. This debt is not resolved.4 
 
Applicant acknowledged during his interview that there may be a judgment 
entered against him for a personal loan that he obtained to upgrade his home (SOR ¶ 
1.c-$16,136). The judgment was entered in February 2010. He had a second loan from 
the same creditor, but was unaware of the amount that may have been past due at that 
time or its current balance (SOR ¶ 1.d-$3,224). He told the investigator that he planned 
to work with his lawyer to resolve these debts. In his answer, Applicant stated he told 
the creditor he would pay $100 a month, and the creditor had accepted his proposal. He 
further stated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was merged with ¶ 1.b, and the payment plan 
was for both debts. Applicant did not provide documented proof of the plan or any 
payments.5 These debts are unresolved.  
 
Applicant indicated in his answer that the collection account debt in SOR ¶ 1.e 
($953) was paid. He did not provide documented evidence to substantiate payment.6 
This debt is unresolved. 
 
Applicant told the investigator in 2012 that he was financially stable and he was 
working with a lawyer to rectify his finances. He stated that he was capable of meeting 
his financial obligations. The debts alleged are corroborated by credit reports from 
September 2014 and December 2015.7 Applicant did not provide information about his 
current finances. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
                                                          
4 Items 2, 4, 5, 6. 
 
5 Items 2, 4, 5, 6. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
4 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
5 
 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty beginning in about 2010. He has a 
judgment from 2010 and several delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to pay. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a appears to have been resolved through foreclosure and 
there is no remaining balance. Applicant has a judgment and other delinquent debts that 
remain unresolved. There is no evidence to substantiate he has made payments or has 
confirmed payment plans with the creditors. The judgment was entered in 2010. During 
his background interview in 2012, Applicant acknowledged it and the other debts. He 
stated he was working with a lawyer to rectify his finances. No evidence was provided 
from his lawyer. Applicant’s history of being unable or unwilling to resolve his debts is 
ongoing. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that it is unlikely similar 
circumstances will recur. His failure to address his debts casts doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 In 2012, Applicant attributed his financial problems to car problems and a late 
mortgage payment in 2010, which resulted in a balloon payment and penalties. He did 
not explain why he was late to pay his mortgage at that time. He then attributed his 
financial problems to a lengthy period of unemployment in 2014 to 2015. His 
unemployment was beyond his control. His failure to pay his mortgage payment in 
2010, was marginally beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. A judgment was 
entered against Applicant in February 2010. It was brought to his attention during his 
2012 interview. There is no evidence that he has made any payments on this debt in the 
past seven years. He was aware of other delinquent debts in 2012 and failed to provide 
evidence that he addressed them before he received the SOR four years later. He 
indicated he now has payment plans and is making payments. No evidence was 
presented to corroborate his assertion. I cannot find that under the circumstances he 
has acted responsibly. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant stated that his lawyer was helping him rectify his finances. Applicant 
did not provide any documented evidence to corroborate that he has confirmed 
payment plans with his creditors and is making payments. There is insufficient evidence 
that he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
his debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) partially applies and 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. His December 2015 credit report 
shows a zero balance on this account. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to this debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old and a military retiree. He has a judgment and other 
delinquent debts that he has been aware of since at least 2012. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
