 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 14-02814 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, 
and Guideline K, handling protected information, due to the isolated nature of the 
incident and the passage of time without evidence of recurrence. Applicant’s eligibility 
for continued access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline K, handling protected 
information. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
The new AGs became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not 
affect my decision in this case.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 1, 2016. He requested a decision based 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 28, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), including documents 
identified as Items 1-7. Applicant received the FORM on October 4, 2016. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and did not object to the 
Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 & 2) are the pleadings in 
the case. Items 3 through 7 are admitted without objection. The case was assigned to 
me on August 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, and the cross-allegation, ¶ 2.a, without comment. 
His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He was born in Vietnam in 1974. He came to the 
United States as an infant, with his parents and siblings in 1975. He was raised and 
educated in the United States. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2000, and married the 
same year. He became a United States citizen in 2003. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant has worked as a manufacturer for his employer, a large defense 
contractor, since 2002. He submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in January 
2011. He stated he was granted a secret clearance in April 2011. (Items 3, 5)2  
 
In May 2011, the Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO) 
requested that Applicant’s security clearance be suspended. The underlying rationale 
was given as follows:  
 
[In December 2010], subject broke company policy by taking a photograph 
with his personal telephone, in an area where photography is prohibited. 
The subject took a photograph of a sensitive item, in an area where he 
                                                          
1 The new Adjudicative Guidelines are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-
6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 There is no documentation from the Government specifying the date Applicant’s clearance was granted.  
 
 
3 
 
 
had no logical reason for being.3 The subject’s actions raise serious 
concerns regarding his reliability and trustworthiness concerning the 
protection of classified information. His continued access to classified 
information is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security.4 
 
In June 2011, DISCO suspended Applicant’s clearance. (Item 7) In September 
2011, Applicant provided an affidavit to a special agent of the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) (Item 5) in which he described the incident as follows:  
 
In May or June 2011 [sic],5 I had an incident regarding a camera phone. 
Camera phones were previously not allowed in the building at all. The 
policy changed and now camera phones are allowed. I understood I was 
not allowed to take pictures of any parts we build, but did not think it was a 
problem to take a picture of a machine because machines are 
everywhere. I took a picture of [name of item]. My son asked how parts 
are made and I said this machine makes the parts and can make 
anything. I took a picture of the machine to show my son.  
 
The operator was standing there and said, “Hey, you can’t take a picture 
of that.” I said OK and deleted the picture. The operator went to his 
supervisor, [name] and told him about me taking the picture. [The 
supervisor] sent me an e-mail asking if I had taken a picture. I spoke with 
[the supervisor] and showed him the phone where I had deleted the 
picture. I then took the initiative to call security . . . . I told [security] what I 
did because I was not trying to hide anything. The security person . . . said 
to delete the picture which I had already done and told me not to do it 
again.6  
 
Applicant then went to the security office, where he received a written copy of the 
company policy about camera use.  
 
I was not previously given any training on this and did not know that I was 
not supposed to use the camera phone for any reason. Security told me it 
                                                          
3 The SOR did not allege that Applicant had no reason to be in the area where he took the photograph, 
and the Government did not provide any argument or evidence (beyond this reference in Item 6) that this 
was the case.  
 
4 Item 6.  
 
5 Relying on this date, the Government argues that Applicant took the picture “immediately on being 
granted a clearance,” in April 2011, thereby calling into serious question his suitability to hold one. FORM 
at 3. I find, however, that the incident occurred in December 2010, as alleged in the SOR, and as 
referenced in the memo prepared by DISCO, the government security office tasked with investigating the 
incident. (Items 1, 6) Applicant therefore took the picture before he was granted a clearance, and before 
he applied for one. However, my decision would be the same if the incident occurred in 2011.  
 
6 Item 5.  
 
 
4 
 
 
was [prohibited] not just inside the facility, but also outside. If it is a rock, 
you can’t take a picture. . . I now know the policy.7  
 
Applicant indicated that he kept his supervisors informed. He was not 
reprimanded. He did not receive a security violation and was not “written up” for any 
misconduct. The next day, he met with his company’s facility security officer. He filled 
out a form detailing what happened. With permission, he gave the camera policy to 
employees he worked with “so that it would be clear to them and no one would make 
the same mistake I did.” (Item 5) 
 
Applicant also said, “I regret taking the picture and it was a lesson hard learned.” 
In August 2011, he learned his clearance was suspended. (Item 5) 
 
In December 2013, Applicant was interviewed by another OPM agent. He largely 
repeated the general details of the incident with the camera phone, and his subsequent 
interactions with his supervisors and security officials. He also said he had no 
intentional security violations and did not knowingly violate policies. He had not had any 
previous or subsequent disciplinary incidents or performance concerns. He indicated 
that he had no intention of committing any future security violations.8  
 
 Guideline E SOR ¶ 1.a is set forth as follows:  
 
On December 14, 2010, you broke [name] company policy by taking a 
photograph of a sensitive item with your personal telephone, in an area 
where photography is prohibited. You received a letter of suspension as 
a result of this incident.  
 
Applicant admitted the allegation (and the Guideline K cross-allegation, ¶ 2.a) 
without comment.9 The record does not contain documentation from Applicant’s 
employer regarding either the company policy in question, or whether Applicant knew 
about the policy before he took the picture.  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”10 
                                                          
7 Item 5.  
 
8 The interview detailed in Item 4 occurred three years after the incident, so it is the only record evidence 
of later events.  
 
9 With his answer, Applicant included a cover letter, and stated, in part, “I hope I filled the form out 
correctly,” but he made no substantive comments. Item 2.  
 
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
5 
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
 In December 2010, Applicant used his personal cellphone to take an 
unauthorized picture of a machine at work, in an area where photography was 
prohibited. He took the photo in full view of the machine operator, who told him he 
should not have done it. Applicant promptly deleted the photo from his phone. He also 
reported the matter to supervisors, and cooperated fully with security. He does not 
appear to have been aware that there was a company policy against taking pictures of 
 
6 
 
 
anything at work, and there is no evidence to the contrary. As a matter of common 
sense, though, he probably should have known that it was poor judgment to take a 
picture of a machine at work with a personal cellphone.  
 
 Nevertheless, having been informed of the company policy and given a copy of it, 
Applicant took it to heart, and saw to it that his own employees were informed about it 
so they would not make the same mistake he did. He informed his supervisors, 
cooperated with security and responded well to their instructions, and expressed regret 
for his action. There is no indication that this is anything other than a one-time incident. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may 
not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized  release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; and 
 
7 
 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
In December 2010, Applicant took a picture of a machine at work, with his 
personal camera phone, without authorization, in an area where photography was 
prohibited. This act calls into question his judgment, trustworthiness and reliability. AG 
¶¶ 16(c), 16(d)(1), and 16(d)(2) are therefore satisfied.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth the applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E:   
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 The above mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant took the photo in full view 
of the machine’s operator, who promptly told him he should not have done it and to 
delete the picture. Applicant did so. He reported the matter to supervisors and to 
security, and cooperated fully. He indicated he was not aware of the company’s policy 
prohibiting the taking of any pictures at work until after the incident, when he was given 
a copy of it. 
 
 This incident occurred more than five-and-a-half years before the SOR was 
issued. There is no indication that it has been repeated. Applicant acknowledged what 
he did, expressed regret for his action, cooperated fully, and responded favorably to 
subsequent guidance and counseling from supervisors and security officials. This was 
an isolated incident that is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d) fully apply.  
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information  
 
AG ¶ 33 details the Guideline K security concern:  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information – which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information - raises 
doubt about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or 
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious 
security concern. 
 
Security clearance cases require administrative judges to assess whether an 
applicant has the requisite good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to be 
 
8 
 
 
entrusted with classified information. When evidence is presented that an applicant 
previously mishandled classified information or violated a rule or regulation for the 
protection of protected information such an applicant bears a heavy burden in 
demonstrating that they should once again be found eligible for a security clearance.11 
 
  AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling protected information, including images, on any unauthorized 
equipment or medium;  
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view protected information outside of one’s 
need to know; and  
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; 
 
The machine Applicant photographed was proprietary, and was in an area where 
photography was prohibited. The machine therefore constituted protected information. 
The personal cell phone he used was “unauthorized equipment” and an “unauthorized 
location” on which to store the image, however briefly. Applicant’s action, satisfies the 
above AGs.  
 
I also considered the conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns 
in AG ¶ 35: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and  
 
 (d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014) (very heavy burden standard); ISCR 
Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (security clearance determinations are “not an exact 
science, but rather predicative judgments.”). 
 
 
9 
 
 
The above mitigating conditions fully apply for the same reasons as set forth under 
Guideline E.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and K in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s continued eligibility for access 
to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2: Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant    
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s continued 
 
10 
 
 
access to classified information. Eligibility for continued access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
