 
1 
  
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-04405 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s home went into 
foreclosure and the mortgage company charged off more than $84,000. Additionally, he 
had seven accounts placed for collection, which totaled more than $35,000, none of which 
have been paid. He also failed to disclose his financial problems when he completed his 
March 2013 security questionnaire. He has failed to mitigate the security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 17, 
2016, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
July 11, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. On August 30, 2016, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). The FORM contained six attachments (Items). On September 9, 2016, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to the 
Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to 
submit any additional information in response to the FORM. The response was due on 
October 9, 2016. No response or other additional information was received from 
Applicant. On August 1, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he disputed six delinquent obligations: SOR 1.c, 
1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. He indicated that in the near future he might seek bankruptcy 
protection. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old senior property industrial security representative who 
has worked for a defense contractor since July 1989 and he seeks to retain3 his security 
clearance.  
 Applicant experienced a December 2010 mortgage default with an $84,000 
charged-off mortgage and seven delinquent obligations totaling more than $35,000. He 
asserted that following foreclosure on his home, the mortgage company made a $24,000 
profit on the property. (Item 1) He provided no documentation corroborating this assertion, 
nor did he explain or provide documentation concerning the $84,000 charged-off 
mortgage debt. 
The delinquent obligations are listed in Applicant’s April 2013 and March 2015 
credit reports. (Items 4 and 5) He asserted his financial problems resulted from separating 
                                                          
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
3 Since June 207, Applicant has held sensitive compartmented information (SCI) access. (Item 2) 
 
3 
from his wife four years earlier, which would have been 2012. He provided no 
corroboration as to the extent the separation had on his ability to meet his financial 
obligations.  
Applicant had financial problems at least in 2007, well before his separation. In his 
June 2007 subject interview, he was questioned about his finances. He stated he had 
consolidated three debts totaling more than $34,000, on which he was to make $770 
monthly payments. The debts were his mortgage (SOR 1.a), the account listed in SOR 
1.c, and to the creditor listed in SOR 1.e. He provided no documentation to corroborate 
he ever made payments in accord with the consolidation agreement.  
 Applicant’s credit report lists two accounts with the same creditor. (Item 4) He was 
paying one account as agreed. He was listed as an authorized user on the other account. 
(Item 4) 
 Applicant provided no documentation corroborating his assertions in his 
SOR response that he had paid or did not owe the listed delinquent accounts. (Item 1) 
He asserted the foreclosure on his home resulted in a profit of $24,000 to the mortgage 
company (SOR 1.a). He asserted that he might claim bankruptcy protection “in the near 
future” to address the $84,000 charged-off mortgage (SOR 1.b). He asserted he would 
soon make payments on the $9,768 collection debt (SOR 1.d). He disputed the delinquent 
obligations in SOR 1.c ($12,749), 1.e ($5,673), and 1.f ($2,190), but these are the same 
three debts he discussed in his June 2007 interview. (Item 3) He asserted the debt in 
SOR 1.f ($2,190) was closed and that he had paid off the delinquent obligations in SOR 
1.h ($4,288) and SOR 1.i ($225). He provided no corroboration to his assertions as to the 
payment of his delinquent obligations.  
In the FORM, Applicant was informed of his need to document the assertions he 
made in his SOR response. The FORM stated in bold print, “Yet, we have seen NO 
CONCERETE DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE, such as receipts, cancelled Checks, written 
payment plan etc. to prove these contentions.” 
 Applicant was informed in the FORM that the delinquent obligation remains 
outstanding and that there was no evidence payments had been made. The FORM 
stated: 
. . . you shall have 30 days from the receipt of this information in which to 
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate . . . If you do not file 
any objections or submit any additional information within 30 days of receipt 
of this letter, you case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely on this file of relevant material. (FORM) 
No response to the FORM was received from Applicant. He did not provide any 
documentation as to payment on or current status of his delinquent obligations. 
 
 
4 
When Applicant completed his March 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he was asked in Section 26 – Financial Record, 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts, if, during the past seven years, had he defaulted 
on any loans; had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account 
or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; been 
more than 120 days delinquent on any debt; or was currently more than 120 days 
delinquent on any debt. He answered “no” to these inquires. However, the foreclosure 
and the collection accounts listed in the SOR appear on his April 2013 credit report. (Item 
4) 
Applicant provided no information as to why he answered “no” to the e-QIP 
financial questions. In his SOR Answer he stated “I have reported this in all my 
background checks since 1989.” (Item 1) However, he provided no copies of those 
background checks to support this allegation. The file does contain his March 2007, 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions, Standard Form (SF) 86, in which he 
answered “no” to all the financial questions. (Item 6) It is not possible from the record to 
determine if he had any delinquent accounts in March 2007 when he completed his SF 
86.  
In addition to failing to reveal his financial problems on his e-QIP, Applicant failed 
to list his 1983 driving under the influence (DUI) arrest. (Item 2) He provided no 
explanation for his failure to reveal his financial problems or DUI on his e-QIP. Although 
not listed his 1983 DUI on his 2013 e-QIP, he did list it on his March 2007 Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions, Standard Form (SF) 86. 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
 
5 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
6 
Applicant’s charged-off mortgage and seven other collection accounts total 
approximately $120,000 in delinquent accounts. AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern any may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
The Government’s evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c). The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. September 22, 2005)). 
 
 Five of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Other than stating Applicant’s financial problems were contributed to by his 
separation from his wife, which occurred four years prior to his July 2016 SOR Answer, 
he provided no information as to the cause of his delinquent obligations. He provided no 
information on how the separation impacted his finances. He asserted, but failed to 
document, that the mortgage company made a $24,000 profit on the property following 
the foreclosure. He did not explain or provide documentation concerning the mortgage 
company charging off more than $84,000.  
 
7 
Applicant asserted that he had paid some of the delinquent obligations and others 
were no longer owed. However, he failed to provide any documentation corroborating his 
assertion of payment. He asserted, but failed to document, that he would soon start 
making payments on one SOR debt (SOR 1.d, $9,768). Again, he has provided no 
documentation corroborating any of his assertions. He stated that in the near future he 
might seek bankruptcy protection. This statement is too speculative as to merit any 
mitigation.  
 
An applicant is not required to be debt free or to develop a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously, but he is required to act responsibly given his 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
“concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the 
plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant must show 
that significant action to implement the plan has occurred, which has not been presented.  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of what responsible steps he has taken to pay or 
resolve his delinquent obligations. There is no evidence the delinquent obligations 
occurred under unusual conditions. The failure to repay has gone on for numerous years. 
These delinquent obligations cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant indicated he separated from his wife in 2012, but failed to provide any 
information as to the impact of his separation on his finances. He failed to show he had 
experienced any periods of unemployment since July 1989. He has been employed with 
the same company for 28 years. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence of 
financial counseling or clear indications that the delinquent obligations are being resolved 
or that his finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no showing of 
Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his delinquent obligations or 
evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable ongoing plan to pay or resolve his 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Applicant disputed four of the SOR debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the majority 
of his debts, because he failed to provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
his disputes. He was an authorized user on one account with a creditor and his credit 
report indicated he is “paying as agreed” on his account with this same creditor. I find for 
him as to SOR 1.g. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The concerns for personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or 
 
8 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
 The undisputed evidence is that Appellant certified to the accuracy of his March 
2013 e-QIP on which he did not list his August 1983 DUI or his delinquent financial 
obligations. Although he did not list his DUI on his March 2013 e-QIP and had listed it on 
his March 2007 SF 86. I find his failure to list the 30 year DUI was not a deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification. I find for him as to SOR 2.b.  
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant falsified his responses to inquiries concerning 
any debts turned over for collection in the past seven years and any accounts or credit 
cards charged off or suspended in the past seven years. He provided no information as 
to his false answers concerning his finances on his e-QIP. In his SOR Answered he 
stated, “I have reported this in all my background checks since 1989.” However, he 
provided no copies of those background checks in which he acknowledged his financial 
problems that would support this allegation.  
 
 Of concern is Applicant’s demonstrated lack of trustworthiness in failing to honestly 
answer the financial questions on his March 2013 e-QIP AG ¶ 16(a) applies to the 
falsification, as follows:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Without any explanation as to why the false answers occurred, the personal 
conduct security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 Applicant’s home went to foreclosure and more than $84,000 was charged off. 
Additionally, he has more than $34,000 in collection accounts, which were reflected on 
his April 2013 credit report. He did not report these derogatory accounts on his March 
2013 e-QIP. He failed to provide adequate mitigating information as to his failure to report 
his financial problems on his 2013 e-QIP. He also failed to document he had reported his 
financial difficulties on “all of his background checks since 1989.” His disclosure of his 
criminal offenses on his March 2007 SF 86 shows he was not attempting to conceal his 
criminal history from the Government. 
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s security concern about his 
delinquent obligation since his June 2007 interview when he was specifically confronted 
about his delinquent obligations. Additionally, the February 2016 SOR and August 2016 
FORM put him on notice of the Government’s concern about the delinquent obligations. 
The FORM specifically informed him there was no evidence that payment had been made 
on the collection accounts or the charged-off account. There is no evidence he has 
contacted his creditors or was able to negotiate a repayment agreement concerning the 
delinquent debts.  
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address the delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only 
the limited response in his SOR Answer, financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns remain.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(c)) He provided no explanation for his false answers on his March 
2013 e-QIP. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
10 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
