 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-08303 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges his debts were discharged under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in 2008, and he has five delinquent debts totaling 
$8,189. Three SOR debts are paid, and he is making payments on two SOR debts. The 
SOR debt total is now $2,415. He has established his financial responsibility. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On March 3, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 4) On March 18, 
2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 
2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. (Item 1) 
 
On April 15, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not 
request a hearing. (Item 3) On August 2, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File 
of Relevant Material (FORM). On August 24, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, and on 
September 20, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received 
Applicant’s response to the FORM. On May 22, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The 
case file consists of nine exhibits. (Items 1-8; FORM response) There were no objections 
to any of the exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted all of the allegations, and he presented 
extenuating and mitigating information. (Item 3) Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old software engineer, and a defense contractor has 
employed him since August 2012.3 He was employed as a carpenter from August 1997 
to August 2012. In 1987, he received a high school diploma, and in 2009, he received an 
associate’s degree. He attended some additional college classes from 2009 to 2013. He 
served in the Air Force from 1989 to 1991, and he received an honorable discharge. In 
1990, he married, and in 1997, he divorced. In 1997, he married. His six children or 
stepchildren were born in 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1999, and 2010. His finances have 
improved since he is only providing support for two children instead of six, and his spouse 
is employed outside of their home. There is no evidence of security violations, alcohol 
abuse, or use of illegal drugs.  
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 The sources for the facts in this paragraph are Applicant’s March 3, 2015 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA) and April 27, 2015 Office of 
Personnel Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI). (Item 4) 
 
3 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s credit reports, SCA, Office of Personnel Management personal subject 
interview (OPM PSI), SOR response, and FORM response establish that Applicant had 
five delinquent debts and his nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 
7 of the Bankruptcy Code in 2008. The status of his five SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant owes a delinquent debt for $495. On September 9, 
2016, the creditor wrote that the account has been satisfied, and Applicant’s credit record 
will be updated accordingly. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant owes a delinquent debt for $1,272. On September 9, 
2016, the creditor wrote that $636 was received from Applicant on April 15, 2016, and the 
balance due was zero. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges Applicant owes a delinquent telecommunications debt for $101. 
The creditor provided an undated letter indicating Applicant’s telecommunications 
account was paid. (FORM response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant owes a delinquent debt for $4,730. On September 9, 
2016, the creditor sent Applicant a settlement agreement indicating the settlement 
balance was $2,365, with $296 monthly payments due from August 31, 2016, to March 
17, 2017. (FORM response) His current balance owed is $1,774. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges Applicant owes a delinquent debt for $1,591. On September 9, 
2016, the creditor wrote that $500 was received towards Applicant’s balance, and 
additional payments were expected on a monthly basis. (FORM response) His current 
balance owed is $641. (FORM response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges Applicant’s nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in March 2008. Applicant took out a variable interest 
rate mortgage loan, and his monthly mortgage payments increased from $800 to $1,400. 
(Item 5) He was unable to afford his mortgage payments. He could not afford his vehicle 
payments, and his vehicle was repossessed. (Item 5) He was unable to afford payments 
on several other debts. (Item 5) After his unsecured nonpriority debts were discharged in 
March 2008, he received a fresh financial start. 
 
Applicant’s credit reports indicate numerous accounts are paid as agreed, current, 
or have a zero balance. (Items 6, 7) For example, his six student loans were merged into 
one debt, and his student loan account is current. The most recent credit report of record 
is dated February 8, 2016, and it provides the status of 33 accounts. (Item 7) There is no 
evidence of financial counseling.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
 
4 
                                         
 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his SCA, 
credit reports, OPM PSI, SOR response, and FORM response. The record establishes 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry 
about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
  
 
6 
                                         
 
Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
  
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
  
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
  
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies. Applicant’s SOR alleges his debts were discharged under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in 2008, and he has five delinquent debts totaling 
$8,189. The bankruptcy was necessary when he was unable to make his payments on a 
variable interest rate mortgage and some other debts. He was supporting six children or 
stepchildren, and his spouse was not employed outside their home. Three SOR debts are 
paid, and he is making payments on the other two SOR debts. The SOR debt total is now 
$2,415. His credit reports indicate numerous accounts are paid as agreed, current, or 
have a zero balance. His non-SOR six student loans were merged into one debt, and his 
student loan account is current. There is no evidence of financial counseling.  
 
Based on Applicant’s track record of paying or resolving his debts, future new 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of his debts showed good 
faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to continue making 
progress paying his remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will conscientiously 
endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
 
8 
                                         
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old software engineer, and a defense contractor has 
employed him since August 2012. He was employed as a carpenter from August 1997 to 
August 2012. In 2009, he received an associate’s degree, and he attended some 
additional college classes from 2009 to 2013. He served in the Air Force from 1989 to 
1991, and he received an honorable discharge. He has six children or stepchildren, and 
his finances have improved since he is currently only providing support for two children. 
His spouse is now employed outside their home. There is no evidence of security 
violations, alcohol abuse, or use of illegal drugs.  
 
Applicant’s SOR debts are either in payment plans or paid. He is making payments 
on two SOR debts totaling $2,415. His most recent credit report reflects his non-SOR 
debts are paid as agreed, are current, or have a zero balance. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt payment or 
resolution as indicated in his credit reports. He understands what he needs to do to 
establish and maintain his financial responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his 
particular financial circumstances to address his delinquent debts.  
 
 
9 
                                         
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
