1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
          ---------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-04397 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern raised 
by her problematic financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on April 21, 2014. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On March 29, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information.1   The SOR detailed the factual 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
2 
 
reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial 
considerations. Applicant answered the SOR on June 27, 2016, and requested a decision 
based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On August 31, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on that same day. She was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on October 4, 2016.3 Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were six items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5.4 Exhibits 1, and 3 through 5 are admitted into 
evidence. Exhibit 2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview 
that took place during the June 2014 background investigation. The ROI is not 
authenticated, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department Counsel’s 
written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond 
to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of 
the authentication requirement. The record does not demonstrate that Applicant 
understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
demonstrate that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 2 is inadmissible, and I have not considered 
the information in the ROI.    
 
 
 
                                                          
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My Decision and 
Formal Findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guideline F.  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 31, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated October 4, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 
30 days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 The first item in the FORM is the SOR, and the second item is Applicant’s Answer. Because the SOR and 
the Answer are the pleadings in this case, they are not marked as Exhibits. Items 3 through 7 are marked 
as Exhibits 1 through 5.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 54 years old, married, with two adult children of her own and two adult 
stepchildren. Since November 2010 she has been employed by a defense contractor. In 
June 2009 she was laid off and remained unemployed until June 2010, when she found 
part-time employment before taking the job with the defense contractor.6 
 
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $17,716, $17,077 of which is a 
charged-off (in October 2011) installment account.7 Three of the debts are for medical 
accounts totaling $546.  Applicant admits all of the SOR debts except for the last debt 
alleged ($93) owed to an electronics company, which Applicant claims she never heard 
of. In her answer she cites her lengthy period of unemployment as part of the reason for 
her indebtedness. In addition, she explained that in June 2014, her spouse was laid off 
when his company relocated to another state. He collected unemployment until he found 
work at a Walmart distribution center in March 2015. In January 2016, he was injured at 
work and began collecting workers’ compensation. At the time of Applicant’s answer, her 
spouse was still unemployed and in the care of his doctors.  
  
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.8 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”9 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.10 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.11 
 
                                                          
6 GE 1.  
 
7 GE 3. In her answer, Applicant calls this her “spouse’s debt.” The credit report, however, describes this 
debt as a joint account. GE 3.  
 
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
9 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
10 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
11 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
4 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.12 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.13 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.14 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.15 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.16 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17 
 
Discussion 
  
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,18 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.19 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
18 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
19 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and,  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a problematic financial 
history since 2011.  This raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
The next inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply. The Government 
correctly observes that the multiple periods of unemployment Applicant and her spouse 
have confronted are circumstances largely beyond Applicant’s control under AG ¶ 20(b). 
I agree. The next inquiry is whether Applicant acted responsibly under those adverse 
circumstances. The single largest delinquent debt was the charge-off in October 2011. 
There is nothing in the record showing any efforts by Applicant to address that 
delinquency. For example, there is no evidence of Applicant making any good-faith efforts 
to pay some of that debt, by payment plan, or otherwise. There is no evidence that 
Applicant sought or received any financial counseling about resolving that delinquency. 
Unfortunately, on this record I cannot find that Applicant acted responsibly as to that 
delinquency. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  Nor do any of the other potentially mitigating 
conditions apply.20 
 
 The record raises doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
                                                          
20 The three medical debts that Applicant admitted and the one consumer debt she denied total $639. That 
amount is de minimis and does not raise security concerns.   
 
6 
 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.21 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                            Against Applicant 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.b-e:                    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
21 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
 
