 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05047 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 25, 2014. On 
August 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The changes 
resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 2, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on September 28, 2016. On September 29, 2016, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on October 7, 2016, and submitted a response, which 
was added to the record without objection.2 The case was assigned to me on August 8, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e. His admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old field services technician employed by a federal 
contractor. He attended technical institutes from November 1998 to September 2002, 
receiving an associate’s degree in December 2000 and a bachelor’s degree in September 
2002. He worked for a federal contractor from January 2001 to April 2008, when he was 
laid off when his employer closed its local factory. He held several intermittent part-time 
jobs from April 2008 to June 2009. He worked full time as a contractor for multiple 
companies from June 2009 to September 2012, when he was hired for his current 
position. He has served as an officer in the Army National Guard from October 2008 to 
the present and has held a security clearance since June 2008.  
 
 Applicant married in 1996, separated in 2011, and divorced in 2012. Applicant and 
his ex-wife had four children, now ages 20, 18, 16, and 10, for whom his ex-wife is 
obligated to pay child support. The divorce was contentious, and Applicant estimated that 
he spent about $20,000 for legal fees and expenses. Applicant’s ex-wife failed to pay 
child support for about two years and now pays it sporadically. Applicant has resided with 
a cohabitant since August 2011.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he and his wife were never good 
at managing their finances. They had “a lot of missed payments and bounced checks 
over the years.” Applicant enrolled in a financial budgeting class around 2009-2010, which 
he found helpful. When Applicant divorced, he had about $40,000 in debts, not including 
                                                          
2 The FORM included Item 4, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on November 13, 
2014. The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed 
Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, 
additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. Applicant submitted a detailed response to the FORM but did not comment on the accuracy 
or completeness of the PSI summary, nor did he object to it. I conclude that he waived any objections to 
the PSI summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to 
take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
3 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
the mortgage loan for the marital home. When he submitted his security clearance 
application in September 2014, he disclosed numerous delinquent debts, including 
student loans. In his response to the FORM, he stated that he has resolved all but about 
$5,000 in delinquent debts, consisting of the debts alleged in the SOR. He did not provide 
any detailed information or documentation regarding his financial situation at the time of 
his divorce or as of the date of his response to the FORM. 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts, which are reflected in credit bureau reports 
(CBRs) from October 2014 and July 2016 (Items 5 and 6). The evidence concerning these 
debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: home mortgage loan past due for $38,189. This account was 
opened in May 2006. Applicant and his wife applied for a refinancing of the loan in 2008 
and stopped making payments while their application was pending. They did not set aside 
the money that would have been used for payments, but instead used it to pay other 
debts. After about four months, their application was denied, and the lender insisted on 
full payment of the past-due amount. Applicant brought the payments up to date in about 
February 2009. The October 2014 CBR reflected the loan payments as current as of May 
2009, but past due for $38,189 as of March 2013, with an outstanding balance of 
$188,527. The July 2016 CBR reflects that the last payment on the loan was in March 
2013.  
 
When Applicant and his wife separated in January 2011, they agreed that 
Applicant would be responsible for the children, live in the marital home, and make the 
payments on the mortgage loan; and his wife would take the family car and make the 
payments on the car loan. He decided to live in his mother’s home and rent out the marital 
home. Shortly after he found renters, his wife stopped making payments on the car loan. 
Since he was not living in the marital home, he decided to have the renters vacate the 
home and stopped making payments on the loan. According to Applicant, the lender for 
the home loan took back the house as “abandoned” and sold it for more than $210,000, 
which was more than the balance of the loan. (Item 2; Response to FORM.) The CBRs 
do not reflect a foreclosure or other disposition of the marital home. Applicant provided 
no documentation reflecting any of the transactions regarding the marital home. There is 
no documentary evidence in the record reflecting that the debt is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c: credit-card accounts charged off for $2,494 and $2,972. 
The October 2014 CBR reflected that both accounts were referred for collection in 
September 2010. In his answer to the SOR and response to the FORM, Applicant 
admitted these debts, explaining that he made payment arrangements with most of his 
creditors but could not afford to pay all of them. These debts are not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: utility bill placed for collection of $477. The October 2014 CBR 
reflected that this debt was referred for collection in May 2014. The July 2016 CBR 
reflected that the account became delinquent in December 2012. Applicant admitted this 
debt but was not sure the amount was correct. The debt is not resolved.  
 
 4
 SOR ¶ 1.e: medical bill placed for collection of $107. Applicant denied this debt 
in his answer to the SOR, stating that he contacted the collection agency and paid it in 
February 2016. He provided no documentation of payment or a dispute filed with the 
collection agency or the credit reporting agency.  
 
 The October 2014 and July 2016 CBRs reflect that Applicant made considerable 
progress with the delinquent debts he had at the time of his divorce. He refinanced his 
student loans and the payments are current. He paid off the delinquent car loan after his 
ex-wife reneged on her promise to pay it, and he qualified for another car loan, on which 
the payments are current. He settled two department store charge accounts and several 
credit-card accounts. He resolved a delinquent time-share loan by giving the lender a 
deed in lieu of foreclosure. He has not incurred any new delinquent debts since the marital 
breakup. On the other hand, he took no action on the delinquent mortgage loan after he 
abandoned the property or the four other delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He has 
not provided any documents reflecting his current income or current living expenses.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
 
 5
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
 
 6
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, his responses to the SOR and the FORM, and the CBRs 
establish the following disqualifying conditions: 
  
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or 
irresponsible spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, 
or other negative financial indicators. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts were numerous. Some 
of them are not yet resolved. In his response to the FORM, he states that the debts are 
not likely to recur because they were the result of his failed marriage and he is no longer 
 
 7
married. However, he is involved in a long-term relationship with a cohabitant, and he has 
not provided any evidence that their financial relationship is structured so that a breakup 
will not again result in unresolved debt.  
  
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s unemployment, underemployment, 
his marital breakup, the legal expenses related to his divorce, his ex-wife’s failure to make 
the car payments as agreed, and his ex-wife’s failure to pay child support for two years 
were conditions beyond his control. He acted responsibly during his unemployment by 
working part time and actively seeking another job. He acted responsibly regarding the 
delinquent car loan and some of his credit cards by keeping in contact with the creditors 
and eventually resolving some of them. He did not act responsibly regarding the defaulted 
home mortgage loan. He walked away from the property and has not presented any 
documentary evidence of the events that followed. He has not acted responsibly 
regarding the two credit-card debts, the utility bill, and the medical bill alleged in the SOR. 
Although more than four years have elapsed since his divorce, he submitted no evidence 
that he remained in contact with the creditors alleged in the SOR or actively tried resolve 
the debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Although Applicant stated that he completed a 
financial budgeting class in 2009-2010, he submitted no documentation of the nature of 
the class or his completion of it. Furthermore, the debts alleged in the SOR are not 
resolved or under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of 
an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection 
procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) The adjudicative 
guidelines do not require that individuals to make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, pay the debts alleged in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. They need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems 
and take significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
 
 Applicant had a plan to resolve the debts resulting from his marital breakup, but he 
stopped executing it without addressing the debts alleged in the SOR. He took no 
significant actions to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a after abandoning the property. He 
presented no documentation showing that the mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a has 
been resolved. He has not disputed the information in the CBRs reflecting that the 
delinquent mortgage loan is not resolved. Applicants who assert that debts are resolved 
are expected to present documentary evidence supporting their assertions. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). In the FORM, Department 
Counsel specifically pointed out that Applicant had not provided any documentation that 
the mortgage debt was resolved. Applicant had a second opportunity to submit 
documentation regarding the defaulted mortgage loan in his response to the FORM, but 
he did not avail himself of the opportunity. 
 
 
 8
AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that 
he disputed the amount of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, but he submitted no 
documentary evidence of a dispute or the basis for it.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant has worked for federal 
contractors, served in the Army National Guard, and held a security clearance for many 
years. However, he provided no information about the quality of his service. He had a 
history of financial problems before he lost his job in April 2008. Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor or to question him about his 
financial problems. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003).  
 
“Once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there 
is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” ISCR 
Case No. 09-01652 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 8, 2011), citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 
1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). Applicant has not overcome that 
presumption. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline 
F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 9
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
