 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-08696 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate the heightened security 
concerns raised by her familial connections to Libya. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the foreign influence guideline. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing to establish her eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
 On April 4, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the record.1 
The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on April 13, 2017. 
 
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 – 3; Applicant’s Exhibits A – L. Applicant’s relevancy objection to Exhibit 3 was 
overruled, but considered in assessing the weight to give the exhibit. Correspondence, sponsorship 
information, withdrawal notice by Applicant’s former counsel, the notice of hearing, and case 
management order are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I – V. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant, 32, was born in Libya. When she was 11 years old, Applicant and her 
family immigrated to the United States. Applicant, her mother, and her two siblings are 
U.S. citizens and they reside in the United States. They all live relatively close to one 
another. Applicant’s brother has been working as a cleared U.S. Government contractor 
since approximately 2009. Applicant started working for the same employer that 
employs her brother in 2015. She recently received a job promotion, which increased 
her annual salary from $57,000 to about $70,000.3 
 
 Applicant’s only immediate family in Libya is her father. Applicant’s father was 
unable to secure gainful employment in the United States and returned to Libya 
sometime in the mid to late 1990s. He was employed in the oil and gas industry in 
Libya, and for a time worked for the Libyan ministry of oil and gas. He is currently 
working in Libya as a private consultant.  
 
 After graduating from high school, Applicant left the United States and moved 
overseas to live with her father. Her parents had divorced, and she left the United 
States to care for her father. Applicant lived with her father from about 2004 to 2014. 
They lived in Country X from 2004 to 2008, residing in an apartment provided by her 
father’s employer. They then lived in Libya from 2008 to 2014 in the house her father 
owns. She left her father’s home in Libya for “safety reasons.” (Exhibit 2 at 4) 
 
Applicant testified that her father is looking to move to the United States, and is in 
the process of liquidating his assets in Libya. He travels frequently to the United States 
to visit Applicant and the rest of the family. Applicant is in daily contact with her father. 
His U.S. green card has expired.4  
 
 Applicant also testified that she has no interest in returning to Libya. She plans 
on remaining in the United States, and identifies herself to others as an American. She 
surrendered her Libyan passport to her facility security officer and is willing to renounce 
her Libyan citizenship. She does not hold any foreign property or assets, and has no 
financial interests in or ties to Libya. Her close circle of friends are mostly made up of 
cleared federal contractors and employees. A number of persons, both co-workers and 
longtime friends, provided letters attesting to Applicant’s honesty, trustworthiness, and 
reliability. Her supervisor submitted a letter, noting Applicant’s strong work ethic and 
favorable work contributions.5 
                                                          
2 The information herein is generally extracted from Applicant’s security clearance application (Exhibit 1), 
security clearance interview (Exhibit 2), Answer, and the cited portions of the record. 
 
3 Tr. 25-33; Exhibits A – E, I – L. The SOR alleges that Applicant’s relationship with her father and siblings 
raises a foreign influence security concern. The evidence does not support the contention that Applicant’s 
relationship with her siblings raises such a concern. Accordingly, SOR 1.b and 1.c are decided in 
Applicant’s favor and will not be further discussed.  
 
4 Tr. 26-38.  
 
5 Tr. 36-39, Exhibit G.  
 
3 
 
Administrative Notice – Libya6 
 
 In 2011, Mu’ammar al-Qadhafi’s 42-year rule of Libya ended. Since then, Libya 
has been mired in conflict. A 2015 U.N.-brokered agreement holds much promise in 
bringing peace and stability to the country, but the “security situation in the country 
remains unpredictable and unstable.”7  
 
The current U.S. State Department travel warning for Libya reflects that “Tripoli 
and other cities have witnessed fighting between armed groups and government forces 
as well as terrorist attacks.” Violent extremist activity in Libya remains high, and 
extremist groups have made threats against U.S. government officials, citizens, and 
interests. Notwithstanding recent military successes, ISIL (Da’esh) maintains a strong 
presence in the country. Due to the security situation on the ground, the U.S. Embassy 
suspended all its operations in Libya in July 2014. 
 
 The current U.S. State Department Human Rights report on Libya notes serious 
human rights problems. The report states that “impunity was a severe and pervasive 
problem” in Libya. And that, due to its limited reach and resources, the Libyan 
government did not take steps to investigate, prosecute, and punish those who 
committed human rights abuses and violations. The report also states that the Libyan 
government did not maintain control over the “Libyan National Army.”8   
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
June 8, 2017, through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).9  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to 
classified information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
                                                          
6 See generally Exhibit 3 and the following U.S. Government publications, which are attached to the 
record as App. Exh. VI and are publically available on the State Department’s and Central Intelligence 
Agency’s websites (state.gov; cia.gov): State Department Travel Warning Libya, updated, Jan. 27, 2017; 
State Department’s Human Rights Report on Libya 2011, 2014, and 2016 (Executive Summaries); State 
Department’s Office of the Historian, A Guide to the United States’ History of Recognition, Diplomatic, and 
Consular by Country, since 1776: Libya; CIA World Factbook: Libya.  
 
7 State Department Travel Warning at 1. 
 
8 State Department 2016 Human Rights Report at 1-2. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). 
 
4 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14.10 Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative 
judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a 
reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same 
record.” Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national 
security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held 
that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
                                                          
10 See also ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017) (favorable decision reversed because 
Department Counsel failed to present evidence to substantiate allegation that was denied by applicant); 
ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (rejecting Department Counsel’s argument that an 
adverse decision can be based solely on non-alleged conduct). 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.11  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all pertinent 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual . . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest;  
                                                          
11 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with foreign relatives faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in 
mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to 
sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access to classified 
information.”12 However, what factor or combination of factors will mitigate security 
concerns raised by an applicant with relatives in a foreign country is not easily 
identifiable or quantifiable.13 
 
 Here, Applicant’s strong relationship with her father is self-evident. She left the 
United States after graduating from high school to care for her father, and lived with him 
for the next decade or so. She lived in Libya caring her father even after the security 
situation in Libya spiraled out of control. She finally left Libya in 2014, which coincided 
with the outbreak of major political violence and the commission of serious human rights 
abuses, including the targeting of civilians, by pro and anti-government forces.14  
 
 In short, Applicant’s relationship with her father, coupled with the chaotic and 
dangerous security situation in Libya, places upon her a very heavy burden in mitigating 
the foreign influence security concerns.15 In mitigation, I have considered Applicant’s 
relatively strong ties to the United States. She went to elementary and high school in the 
United States. Her immediate family members, other than her father, live relatively close 
to her in the United States. She also has a strong network of close friends in the United 
States, and has earned the trust and respect of her employer.  
 
 Additionally, Applicant fully reported and openly discussed her foreign 
connections during the course of the security clearance process. Also, Applicant 
surrendered her Libyan passport and credibly testified about her willingness to 
renounce her Libyan citizenship. 
 
 At the same time though, Applicant’s relationship with her father remains rock 
solid and the threat that a foreign entity or group with interests adverse to the United 
States could attempt to influence her through this relationship remains. Applicant’s 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
14 State Department 2014 Human Rights Report at 1. See also Exhibit 2 (security clearance interview) at 
4 (applicant states she left her father’s home in Libya in 2014 for “safety reasons.”) 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017) (heightened level of scrutiny warranted when 
an applicant’s relatives reside in a country with an ongoing civil war and the presence of hostile forces). 
 
7 
 
connections to the United States and other favorable record evidence is insufficient to 
fully mitigate the security concerns raised by this serious security threat.16  
 
 However, this adverse security assessment is not a comment on Applicant’s 
patriotism or loyalty. Instead, it is an acknowledgment that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, 
such as a family member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:             For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.17 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 Specifically, I find that AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Although AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(e) have some limited 
applicability, these mitigating factors and other favorable record evidence (see generally AG ¶ 2(d)) are 
insufficient to mitigate the heightened security concerns at issue. I considered the previous version of the 
guidelines and the changes occasioned by the implementation of SEAD-4. However, these changes did 
not significantly alter my analysis nor did it change my ultimate decision.  
 
17 I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C. Applicant’s unique qualifications, innate 
abilities and talents, and hard work ethic would clearly serve to benefit the United States. However, in 
light of the heightened security concerns raised by Applicant’s present circumstances, I do not find that 
any of the listed exceptions are warranted. See generally SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h); contrast with 
ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) (under previous version of the guidelines, judges 
had “no authority to grant an interim, conditional or probationary clearance.”)  
