1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Named Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08246 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing  
security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was initially taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, the AGs were updated and cancelled the AGs effective September 1, 2006.  This 
decision will be decided based on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were to 
consider this case under the AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the 
same outcome.  
  
 On December 19, 2016, Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
January 30, 2017. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 21, 
2017, and transferred to me on May 17, 2017. On May 17, 2017, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for June 20, 2017. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits, which were 
admitted without objection as Government (Gov) Exhibits 1 - 6.  Applicant offered 13 
2 
 
exhibits, which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - M, without objection. The 
Government requested administrative notice be taken of certain facts regarding the 
country of Pakistan. The administrative notice document was marked as Administrative 
Notice Document (Admin Not) I. Applicant did not object to the administrative notice 
documents. The transcript was received on June 28, 2017. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Administrative Notice – Pakistan     
 
  The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge 
and matters not subject to reasonable dispute.  
 
  Pakistan continues to have serious human rights problems including extrajudicial 
and targeted killings, disappearances, torture, lack of rule of law (including lack of due 
process, poor implementation and enforcement of laws, frequent mob violence and 
vigilante justice, and sectarian violence). Government and police corruption as well as 
rape, domestic violence, sexual harassment, honor crimes, and discrimination against 
women and girls remain serious problems. Lack of government accountability is a 
problem. Abuses often went unpunished fostering a culture of impunity. Authorities 
seldom punish government officials for human rights violations. (Admin Not 1)  
 
  In 2015, an assortment of terrorist groups attempted to hide or operate from 
portions of Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas, a mountainous region along 
Pakistan’s northwest border with Afghanistan. Pakistan launched military operations to 
eradicate terrorist safe havens, although their impact was uneven. As of February 2015, 
the U.S. State Department warned U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to 
Pakistan, because the presence of several foreign and indigenous terrorist groups 
poses a potential danger to U.S. citizens throughout Pakistan. Further concerns about 
Pakistan include the potential for weapons of mass destruction, trafficking, and 
proliferation. (Admin Not 1)  
     
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant partially admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 2.a, and 2.c. He partially admits the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, and denies the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.b.  
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old linguist who is  a potential employee of a Department 
of Defense contractor and is reapplying for a security clearance. His employment is 
contingent on receiving a security clearance.  He is working on his general equivalency 
degree (GED).  He is married and has two daughters, ages four and six months. (Note: 
The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, 
or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.)  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan. In 1995, at the age of three, Applicant moved to 
the United States with his siblings to live with his father who was already in the United 
States. He became a United States citizen in April 2000 by virtue of his father’s 
naturalization. He has a U.S. passport. He does not have a Pakistani passport. All of his 
immediate family members are United States citizens with the exception of his mother 
and wife. His mother and wife are citizens of Pakistan and are permanent residents in 
the United States. His wife is in the process of applying for citizenship. She has lived in 
the U.S. since 2012. His two daughters are citizens of and reside in the United States. 
(Tr. 21-26, 36, AE H, AE I)    
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Pakistan.  His father-in-law 
is a citizen of Pakistan, who works and resides in Sweden. He speaks to his in-laws 
about once a year. They do not know what he does for a living. His wife talks to her 
mother about once or twice a month by telephone. The last time she saw her mother 
was in 2013 when she traveled to Pakistan to visit her. His wife talks to her father about 
once a year. Neither Applicant or his wife own any property in Pakistan. They also do 
not have any open bank or financial accounts in Pakistan. (Tr. 23, 25, 27, 36-39) 
 
In addition to her mother, Applicant’s wife has four sisters and a brother who are 
citizens and residents of Pakistan.  Applicant also has two brothers-in-law and two 
friends who are citizens and residents of Pakistan.  He has two friends who are citizens  
and residents of Pakistan.  Applicant indicated that he had quarterly contact with his 
wife’s relatives and friends in Pakistan when he completed his most recent security 
clearance application in September 2015. During the hearing and in response to the 
SOR, Applicant claimed that he no longer has frequent contact with any of his wife’s 
relatives or his friends who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. (Tr. 40-46; Gov 1; 
Answer to SOR) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified substantive facts on his June 27, 2011, 
July 6, 2011, and October 3, 2013 security clearance applications by failing to list an 
arrest in response to Section 22: Police Record.  He failed to list a 2008 arrest for 
possession of a weapon (a knife) in a school zone in 2008. (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h, 1.i: Gov 2 
at 3; Gov 3 at 26; Gov 4 at 30) Applicant was a teenager at the time. He and a friend 
skipped school and were hanging out near another school. They were approached by a 
police officer who asked them why they were not in school during school hours. 
Applicant testified it was a school security officer.  A search was conducted and a knife 
was found on Applicant’s person. The security officer drove Applicant home. Applicant 
did not attend a court hearing. His father attended a meeting on his behalf. Applicant is 
not sure that he was arrested. (Tr. 29-31, 49)  
 
In his Response to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he omitted his 2008 arrest 
for possession of a weapon (knife) in a school zone. He states: 
 
4 
 
I admit that I did put “No” when I should have put “yes”. This incident 
happened in 2008, and I didn’t think I had to disclose that information 
since I was a minor. I was arrested because I had a small pocket knife in 
my pocket. I again was young and scared that this would hurt my career. 
At the time of filling out the SF-86, I did not fully understand this process, 
and did not think that this would be used against me. I regret making a 
decision to falsify the document, however, this happened over three years 
ago and I will not make this mistake in the future.”  (Response to SOR, 
paragraphs 2.f, 2.h, and 2.i)   
 
The SOR also alleged that Applicant intentionally lied about the details related to 
his 2008 arrest for possession of a weapon (knife) in a school zone during two separate 
screening interviews, which occurred in July 2011 and October 2013. (SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c: 
Gov 5; Gov 6)  In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied that he lied about the 
details of his 2008 arrest during his 2013 interview. (SOR ¶ 2.b) He claims he told the 
interviewer about the arrest. A summary of the interview corroborates that he disclosed 
the 2008 arrest during the 2013 interview. During the interview, Applicant could not 
recall the specific details. I do not find the faulty details he provided during the interview 
to be material. He told the Government about his 2008 arrest. SOR ¶ 2.b is found for 
Applicant. (See Gov 5. I also note that Gov 5 is an unsworn summary of what took place 
during the interview. For this reason, I give it less weight.)  
 
Applicant admits to intentionally omitting the 2008 arrest during his July 2011 
security screening interview. (SOR ¶ 2.c)  He states: 
 
In 2011 I was young and very new to this security clearance process. I did 
not fully understand my actions would affect my security clearance. During 
the interview I was very scared to tell the truth. I was immature, and did 
not understand the seriousness of this situation. I truly regret that I lied 
about this. Now that I am fully aware of this process, this behavior will not 
recur in the future. (Response to SOR, paragraph 2.c) 
 
From July 2011 to February 2012, Applicant worked for a DOD contractor as a 
linguist in Afghanistan. He testified that he had a security clearance at the time. In 
February 2012, Applicant was fired after failing a drug test. He claims he borrowed a 
cigarette from one of his fellow linguists, which, unbeknownst to him was laced with an 
illegal drug, possibly hashish. Several days later, Applicant’s company had all 
employees undergo a drug test. Applicant’s urine tested positive for illegal drugs and he  
was sent home and his security clearance was suspended. (SOR ¶ 2.a: Tr. 28-29, 46; 
Gov 1, section 13A(4))  
 
Applicant is alleged to have deliberately falsified material facts on a security 
clearance application, dated October 3, 2013, in response to questions in Section 13A – 
Employment Activities. (SOR ¶¶ 2.d, 2.e) In response to the statement: “Provide the 
reason for leaving the employment activity.” Applicant stated that he “. . . had worked for 
awhile and needed to come back to my family.” He deliberately failed to disclose that he 
was fired by his employer for failing a drug test.  He also failed to disclose this 
information in response to the additional questions under Section 13A, “For this 
5 
 
employment have any of the following happened to you in the last seven (7) years? 
Fired. Quit a job after being told you were fired . . . .” (Gov 2 at 11) 
 
Applicant also deliberately falsified his October 3, 2013 security clearance 
application in response to Section 23: Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity: Have you 
EVER illegally used or otherwise been involved with a drug or controlled substance 
while possessing a security clearance other than previously listed?” Applicant 
answered, “No” and omitted his 2012 positive drug test which occurred while he 
possessed a security clearance. (SOR ¶ 2.g: Gov 2, section 23)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.d, 
2.e and 2.g, pertaining to his deliberate omission of his termination as a linguist in 
Afghanistan after a positive drug test. He indicates that he was concerned about his 
future so he did not disclose the fact that he was fired and that he “involuntarily” used 
drugs. He regrets not being fully truthful and states that this behavior will not recur in the 
future. He is a very honest man who truly regrets the mistake he made. (Response to 
SOR ¶¶ 2.d, 2.e, and 2.g)  
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that while he was working in Afghanistan, 
another linguist gave him a cigarette. The cigarette had some sort of controlled 
substance in it, possibly hashish. The next day Applicant’s company had a company 
drug test. Applicant tested positive for illegal drugs, was fired, and sent back to the 
United States. Applicant was 19 at the time. He has not used any illegal drugs since that 
time.  (Tr. 28-29, 47)  
 
When asked why he failed to list that he was fired for failing a drug test on his 
October 2013 security clearance applications, Applicant initially claimed that he made a 
mistake. He found completing the e-QIP to be overwhelming. He also testified: “I’m 
sorry. I made a mistake. I was thinking it might harm my situation.” (Tr. 33) Under cross-
examination, he testified: “All right. So, that was the only reason. And also, I was scared 
that I might lose my job.” (Tr. 48) “I was actually also hurt by the mistake I made in my 
life. And I was really ashamed to put it in my records, on my SF-86.” (Tr. 52) Applicant 
said that his conduct will never happen again.  It is noted that he listed that he was fired 
because he failed a drug test in February 2012, on his most recent security clearance 
application dated September 22, 2015. (Gov 1, Section 13 A.4)  
 
Whole-person Factors 
 
Applicant provided several letters of recommendation. A U.S. Army Warrant 
Officer writes that Applicant was assigned to his special operations team from mid 2011 
to early 2012. Applicant served as an interpreter supporting U.S. Special Forces 
operations alongside Afghan commandos and Afghan local police. He states Applicant 
was one of the best interpreters he worked with in Afghanistan. Applicant was 
competent in several languages and was committed to the mission. He recommends 
him for any interpreter position. (AE D)   
 
A Sergeant First Class states Applicant performed his duties in an excellent and 
professional manner. Applicant’s unique language skills and knowledge of the area 
6 
 
were essential to mission success. Applicant supported multiple operations in remote 
and dangerous locations. He displayed good tactical sense and ability while operating in 
a physically challenging and dangerous terrain. The Sergeant First Class states  
Applicant’s ability to accurately translate from the target language to English enabled 
the special forces team to pass time-sensitive information related to force protection and 
early warning to the ground force commander. He highly recommends Applicant, stating 
that he would be an asset to any team. (AE D)  
 
Mr. A. has been a personal friend with Applicant since 2011. They get together 
several times a year to play sports. Applicant has invited him over to his home several 
times and he has gotten to know other members of Applicant’s family. He is impressed 
with Applicant’s maturity and honesty. He states Applicant’s family and friends are 
important to him. He believes Applicant has a strong character and he would 
recommend him for any role. Another fellow cricket player, his current supervisor, and a 
former supervisor provided favorable recommendations about Applicant’s work ethic, 
trustworthiness, and character. (AE D; AE M)  
 
Applicant provided numerous photos of his family as well as his sports teams. He 
is an avid cricket player. (AE E; AE L) Applicant took a urinalysis on May 19, 2017. The 
results were negative for amphetamines, marijuana, phencyclidine, cocaine and 
opiates. (AE F) He also provided a notarized statement of intent to never use illegal 
drugs in the future. (AE J)  
 
Applicant provided a copy of his U.S. passport (AE H), and his wife’s permanent 
resident card. (AE I)  He also provided a notarized statement of intent to never obtain a 
foreign passport or foreign citizenship. He also pledges to have minimal or no contact 
with foreign contacts outside of his official duties. (AE K)  
 
Applicant also attempted to obtain a copy of the records related to his 2008 
arrest. The Court did not find any records because all juvenile records are destroyed 
when the juvenile turns 18. (AE G)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
7 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE B: Foreign Influence 
 
   AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern under Foreign Influence:   
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are applicable to Applicant’s case: 
8 
 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign  country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
In Applicant’s case, AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶ 7(b) apply. The mere possession of 
close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country 
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant’s parents-in-law and sisters-
in-law are citizens and residents of Pakistan. His relationship with his wife’s family 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion because Pakistan is a known haven for terrorist groups and has serious 
human rights problems.  Applicant’s contacts with his in-laws in Pakistan also create a 
potential conflict of interest between his obligation to protect classified information and 
his desire to help his family members by providing that information.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
  
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
  
9 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 I find AG ¶ 8(a) and AG ¶ 8(b) apply to Applicant’s case. It is clear that 
Applicant’s wife has ties of affection and obligation to her siblings who reside in 
Pakistan. However, it is unlikely Applicant will have to choose between the interests of 
his in-laws and the interests of the United States. Applicant is not close to his in-laws. 
He speaks with them about once a year. All of his immediate family members reside in 
the United States and are all U.S. citizens with exception of his wife and mother. Both 
are permanent residents of the U.S. and his wife is in the process of applying for U.S. 
citizenship. Applicant’s immediate family members (his wife and two daughters) reside 
with him in the United States. All of their assets are in the United States.    
  
 AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has deep and longstanding ties in the 
United States. Applicant has lived in the United States since 1995 when he immigrated 
at the age of three with his family. He became a U.S. citizen in 2000.  His professional 
life has been in the United States with the exception of his six-month deployment to 
Afghanistan. Two U.S. Army personnel who worked with Applicant said he did an 
excellent job as an interpreter and worked along-side them in dangerous conditions.   
Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests based on his  
longstanding ties in the United States. Security concerns under Foreign Influence are 
mitigated.  
 
GUIDELINE E: Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 explains the Government’s concern under Personal Conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or 
polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
10 
 
 
 
AG ¶16 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or government protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
11 
 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in 
that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, while legal 
there, is illegal in the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) applies to Applicant’s deliberate omission of relevant facts on his  
security clearance applications completed on June 27, 2011, July 6, 2011, and October 
3, 2013, pertaining to his arrest history, wherein he failed to list his 2008 arrest for 
possession of a weapon (knife) in a school zone, as well his deliberate failure to 
disclose on his October 2013 security clearance application that he was fired in March 
2012 from a DOD Contractor position as a linguist for failing a drug test, as well his use 
of said illegal drug while holding a security clearance.  Applicant admits that he 
deliberately provided false information on his security clearance applications. He claims 
he was not familiar with the security clearance process but admits he was concerned 
about his future, so he deliberately left off the adverse information on his security 
clearance applications.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(b) applies with regards to Applicant’s intentional omission of his 2008 
arrest for possession of a weapon (knife) ins a school zone during his 2011 security 
clearance screening interview. (SOR ¶ 2.c) In his response to the SOR, Applicant states 
he was young and very new to the security clearance process and did not understand 
how his actions would affect his security clearance. He was immature and very afraid to 
tell the truth. He regrets that he lied and claims the behavior will not recur in the future.  
I find SOR ¶ 2.b for Applicant. He admitted to the arrest during his 2013 security 
clearance screening interview. He did not recall the details, but I find his initial incorrect 
assertions to be immaterial.   
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies with response to Applicant’s illegal drug use while possessing 
a security clearance. (SOR ¶ 2.a) Applicant was employed as a linguist in a deployed 
location when he tested positive for illegal drugs in 2012.  Although more than five years 
have passed since the incident, it still raises questions about Applicant’s judgment, 
trustworthiness and reliability. It is also demonstrates an unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations and raises questions about Applicant’s ability to safeguard 
classified information.   
 
 AG ¶ 16(d) applies because Applicant’s multiple falsifications during his security 
clearance process shows “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.” AG ¶ 16(e)(1) and 
AG ¶ 16(e)(3) apply because Applicant’s illegal drug use and his subsequent attempted 
concealment about his illegal drug use and termination makes him vulnerable to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual 
groups.  
12 
 
 Applicant has the burden to present mitigating evidence.  AG ¶ 17 lists conditions 
that could mitigate security concerns under Personal Conduct. The mitigating factors 
that apply to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Of the mitigating factors under Personal Conduct, only AG ¶ 17(e) applies 
because Applicant admits his past conduct and subsequent deliberate falsifications. He 
also listed the 2012 firing for testing positive for illegal drug use on his most recent 
security clearance application in September 2015. However, Applicant’s admissions and 
disclosures do not fully mitigate his past conduct to include deliberate falsifications. 
Applicant lied repeatedly about the circumstances related to his 2008 arrest for 
possession of a weapon in a school zone and about his termination from his linguist 
position overseas after failing a drug test. This was an issue that could be readily 
discovered during his background investigation, but Applicant lied about it repeatedly on 
his October 2013 security clearance application. Questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment remain. None of the other mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
13 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant moved to the 
United States at the age of three with his family. He became a citizen in 2000.  His wife 
and mother are permanent U.S. residents. The rest of Applicant’s immediate family 
members are citizens and residents of the United States. His wife and two children 
reside in the United States. His wife is in the process of applying for U.S. citizenship. He 
mitigated foreign influence concerns because he has limited contact with his wife’s in-
laws who are citizens of and reside in Pakistan and Sweden.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character references. In particular, the 
references of two U.S. Army Special Forces Team members who attested to Applicant’s 
interpreter skills and the value he provided to the mission, sometimes under dangerous 
conditions. Several of Applicant’s supervisors and friends have attested to his good 
character and work ethic. The photos indicate that Applicant is a dedicated father and 
family man. 
 
However, Applicant’s unfavorable factors outweigh his favorable factors. He  
chose to use illegal drugs while in Afghanistan, which cost him his job after testing 
positive for illegal drugs. He possessed a security clearance at the time of his illegal 
drug use. He then deliberately lied about this incident on a subsequent security 
clearance application in 2013.  Applicant had previously lied about his 2008 arrest for 
possession of a weapon in a school zone on previous security clearance applications 
and during his background interview in 2011. The 2008 incident itself did not raise much  
concern, it was the deliberate and repeated lies about it that raised concerns about 
Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability.      
 
Applicant’s decision to use illegal drugs while working as a linguist in Afghanistan 
and his deliberate falsifications about it on his 2013 security clearance application 
continues to raise questions about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Security 
concerns remain under Personal Conduct.    
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.c:   For Applicant 
    
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a, 2.c- 2.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
