 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00230 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concern raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On May 14, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 1, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging a security concern under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
The action was taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) in effect on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG 
were implemented and became effective that day. I considered both sets of guidelines in 
reaching this decision, and it would be the same under either set.  
 
On May 5, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR in writing and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.) On June 28, 2016, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven 
Items, and mailed it to Applicant on June 30, 2016. He received the FORM on July 18, 
2016, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional information.  
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant did not provide a response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, 
or submit documents. The Government’s evidence is admitted. On June 7, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the sole allegation in the SOR. (Item 3.) After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
   
Applicant is 41 years old and married. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2011. He 
has worked for a defense contractor since 2008. (Item 4.)  
 
In 2005, Applicant helped his wife refinance the mortgage she had on their current 
residence and placed his name on the mortgage documents. In 2009, they purchased 
another house prior to selling their current residence and incurred an additional mortgage 
payment. Applicant was unable to sell their current residence because of the housing 
market. He subsequently defaulted on the mortgage loan used to buy the second house 
by failing to make more than $27,000 in required payments, and the bank foreclosed on 
the property in January 2013. In April 2013, the house was sold and there was a $59,878 
deficiency. (Item 3.)  
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted that he held a mortgage with a certain bank, but 
denied that he was indebted to the bank subsequent to the foreclosure on the property. 
He asserted that he does not owe a deficiency balance on the mortgage. (Item 3.) In the 
FORM, Department Counsel notified Applicant that he did not provide credible 
information, such as a Cancellation of Debt Form 1099C, or other documents to confirm 
his assertion. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AGs. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny 
of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. See Executive 
Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets out the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant has a large unresolved mortgage delinquency that he has been unable 
or unwilling to resolve since April 2013. The evidence raised the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides four conditions that could mitigate those security concerns: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
          AG ¶ 20(b) provides minimal mitigation of the raised security concerns. In 2009, 
Applicant purchased another residence before he sold the one in which he was residing. 
At that time the housing market was stagnant, causing him difficulty in locating a buyer. 
While the housing market situation was a circumstance beyond his control, his decision 
to purchase another house before selling his residence was a factor within his control. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.     
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) or AG ¶ 20(d). 
Applicant did not provide documentation that he obtained financial counseling for the 
problem and there is no evidence that the delinquent debt is resolved or under control. 
He did not submit evidence that he made a good–faith effort to resolve the matters. 
Applicant insisted that he is not responsible for the mortgage delinquency; however, he 
did not provide documented evidence to verify his position. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 AG ¶ 2(a) requires an administrative judge to evaluate an applicant’s national 
security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances, commonly referred to as the whole-person concept. Under AG ¶ 2(c) the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must include 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and the whole-person concept. The administrative judge should also consider the 
following nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 41-year-old man, 
who has worked for a defense contractor since 2008. In 2013, a bank foreclosed on his 
property after he failed to make more than $27,000 worth of required mortgage payments. 
Although he stated he does not owe any mortgage deficiency after the foreclosure sale, 
he failed to provide proof of his position. In its FORM, Department Counsel clearly pointed 
out that the documents he submitted with his Answer did not resolve the allegation. 
Despite being on notice of the Government’s concern, he failed to submit additional 
evidence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:              Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
