 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06159 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 7, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on August 3, 2016. 
She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 10. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. The case was 
assigned to me on June 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She received a General Equivalency Diploma. She 
took a couple college classes, but did not complete them. She married in 1998. She has 
three grown children from the union, ages 31, 29, and 28. She is working two part-time 
jobs, while seeking full-time employment that requires a security clearance. She 
disclosed two periods of unemployment from November 2013 to April 2014 and from 
August 2012 to October 2012. She did not disclose her current income or her husband’s 
employment status or income.2   
 
 In 2009, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. She listed her liabilities as 
approximately $37,000. In her November 2014 interview with a government investigator, 
she explained she had to file bankruptcy because she overspent and fell behind on her 
debts. She stated that she made monthly payments between $300 and $400 until the 
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2013 after she resigned from her job due to “the long 
drive.” She acknowledged to the investigator that she still owed the debts.3  
 
 Applicant disclosed on her security clearance application (SCA) that in October 
2011, she was arrested and charged with deposit account fraud/bad checks $499 or 
less. In November 2011, she was found guilty, sentenced to 12 months probation and 
fined. She completed the terms of the sentence.4 
 
 The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts for medical services, cell phone contracts, 
student loans, defaulted vehicle loans, and a returned check, (ranging from $27 to 
$10,185) totaling approximately $30,283. Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from 
March 2013, July 2015, and January 2016, substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR.5  
 
                                                          
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Items 7, 10. 
 
4 Items 4, 5, 7. 
 
5 Items 3, 6, 7, 8, 9. 
 
3 
 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she is attempting to pay her 
delinquent bills and makes some payments when she has extra money. She stated she 
made two payments toward one of the cell phone bills and her student loan. She stated 
she was a hard worker, has had some hard times in her life, and wanted an opportunity 
to prove herself. In the FORM, the Department Counsel explained it was important to 
provide documents to show the actions Applicant may have taken to resolve her 
financial issues. None were provided. She did not disclose any information about her 
current income, budget, counseling, or other financial matters.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
6 FORM; Item 3.  
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
 Applicant has experienced financial difficulty since before 2009 when she filed 
bankruptcy. She has numerous delinquent debts that she is unable or unwilling to pay. 
 
5 
 
 
She has a conviction for deposit account fraud/bad checks. There is sufficient evidence 
to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. There is no 
evidence to substantiate she is taking action to resolve them. During her personal 
subject interview in 2015, she indicated she would pay them when she had a good job. 
She mentioned in her answer to the SOR that she had made two payments on her 
debts, but did not provide documentary evidence. Applicant’s history of being unable or 
unwilling to resolve her debts is ongoing. She also has a conviction for deposit 
fraud/bad checks, which is a serious concern. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
that it is unlikely similar circumstances will recur. Her failure to address even the 
smallest of her debts and her conviction casts doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant disclosed periods of unemployment, which likely affected her ability to 
pay her bills. However, she also indicated that she stopped making payments on her 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy because she resigned from her job, a condition that was within 
her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant failed to provide evidence to make such a 
conclusion. She did not provide proof of payments she may have made to resolve her 
delinquent debts. There is no information about her current finances. I cannot find that 
under the circumstances she has acted responsibly. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 There is no evidence that supports Applicant has had financial counseling or that 
there are clear indications her financial problems are being resolved or under control. 
There is no evidence that she has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve her debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old. She has a history of financial problems that include a 
dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2013, a conviction for deposit account fraud/bad 
checks in 2011, which is a concern, and numerous delinquent debts. She did not 
provide sufficient evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u:  Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
