 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04976 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding drug involvement and 
substance misuse and criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated November 2, 2014). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 5, 2016. In a sworn statement, dated 
January 22, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on June 1, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2016. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on August 31, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
September 21, 2016. 
 
 During the hearing, three Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, one 
Administrative exhibit, and six Applicant exhibits (AE) A through AE F were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
September 29, 2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took 
advantage of that opportunity and timely submitted a number of documents, which were 
marked and admitted as AE G through AE I, without objection. The record closed on 
October 19, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, generally comments, both of the 
factual allegations pertaining to drug involvement (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) and criminal conduct  
(¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a 
modelling autonomic communication environments (MACE) developer with the company 
since October 2014. He previously held a number of diverse full-time and part-time 
positions with a variety of other employers. He was a lawn care, landscaping, and 
decorative lighting specialist, a quality assurance technician, and a cashier. He also went 
through extensive periods of relatively short-term unemployment.  He is a May 2001 high 
school graduate, and he earned an associate’s degree in December 2009 and a 
bachelor’s of science degree in August 2014. Applicant has never served in the U.S. 
military. He has never held a security clearance. He was married under common law, 
effective January 2009. He has one son from this relationship, born in 2008. 
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse, and Criminal Conduct3 
 
 Applicant was a substance abuser whose choice of substances was Oxycodone, 
an opioid pain medication prescribed and used to treat moderate to severe pain. He was 
never prescribed Oxycodone. Applicant commenced purchasing and using Oxycodone, 
without a prescription, in January 2002, around his 20th birthday, when he was with his 
high school girlfriend (and eventual fiancée). At first, they split one tablet, but eventually 
they each took an entire tablet, and then sometimes two tablets. He enjoyed the euphoric 
feelings he derived from the drug (that lasted for up to six hours) and was still able to 
perform his normal duties. Within about two and one-half years later, he started snorting 
the substance instead of ingesting it. At one point, he snorted Oxycodone on an almost 
daily basis. Applicant usually purchased 20mg to 60mg of Oxycodone for each use, and 
he would spend $50 per day.  
 
By late 2006, Applicant’s use of Oxycodone declined to “a handful of times per 
month (versus) a handful of times per week. However, at the beginning of 2009, a number 
of factors caused him, once again, to increase his usage to enable him to escape certain 
life problems. The factors he cited were the pressures associated with beginning college 
again; a newborn child; financial strain; and his grandfather’s terminal illness. Applicant 
acknowledged that Oxycodone did not allow him to reach his full potential as he could not 
follow through on things. He had no self-confidence, and that affected his employment. 
His use of Oxycodone contributed to his financial issues and earning ability.  
 
Applicant’s use or possession of Oxycodone resulted in two incidents involving law 
enforcement authorities:  
 
In April 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of a controlled 
substance after he was stopped by the police for a traffic infraction. A search of the vehicle 
revealed seven Oxycodone pills that Applicant had purchased earlier in the day through 
a friend. Applicant was eventually convicted of the charge, fined $4,500, and placed on 
supervised probation for two years;  
 
On September 29, 2013, Applicant was stopped by police, arrested, and charged 
with unlawful possession of a controlled substance, a felony, and attempt to elude, a 
misdemeanor. A search of Applicant’s vehicle did not turn up any drugs, but the search 
of his passenger – a coworker and former source for Oxycodone – found a prescription 
bottle and plastic bag containing pills that were actually prescribed for his passenger. 
Nevertheless, Applicant was jailed overnight and eventually scheduled for trial when 
Applicant was unable to furnish the police with evidence against his passenger. The 
charge of unlawful possession of a controlled substance was reduced to illegal 
possession of a prescription drug, and the charge of attempt to elude was dismissed. On 
his plea, Applicant was convicted of the charge, fined, incarcerated for 365 days 
(suspended for the term of probation, and given credit for time served), ordered to perform 
                                                          
3 The sources of the information regarding Applicant’s association with drugs are found in GE 1, supra note 
1, at 48-53; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 24, 2015, at 4-6); and GE 3 (Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated November 4, 2014). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
20 hours of community service, and placed on unsupervised probation for two years, 
commencing on November 12, 2015.4 It appears that Applicant is still on probation. 
Despite his plea, Applicant denied that he was involved in the drug possession charges, 
and he stated that he simply entered the plea because his attorney advised him that the 
deal calling for a simple violation of one charge would be better than a conviction on two 
criminal charges. Applicant completed his community service at the local animal shelter 
in February 2016,5 and paid off his fine in October 2016.6  
 
Applicant’s Oxycodone misuse peaked in late 2009, and with encouragement from 
his wife, who does not use drugs, he sought treatment. In November 2009, Applicant 
underwent a complete physical examination and assessment by physicians and licensed 
practical nurses. He was diagnosed with opioid dependence, continuous (ICD-9-CM 
Diagnosis Code 304.01),7 and he was prescribed Suboxone®, used in the treatment of 
opioid addiction. Applicant was under the continuous medical supervision of the clinic 
from November 12, 2009 until at least April 30, 2015. During that period, he was 
administered routine drug tests and given physical examinations. He also attended 
several required sessions of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Applicant last used Oxycodone 
in early November 2009.8 Applicant’s last prescription for Suboxone® expired in early June 
2015, and it was never renewed as he no longer needed it. Applicant does not have any 
cravings for Oxycodone.9 Applicant has dissociated himself for known drug users. 
 
Applicant’s intentions regarding the future use of any illegal substance or 
medication that was not prescribed for him are unambiguous:10 
 
I have been prescribed this medicine [since 2009] and I have been drug-
free for the past 5 years. I will not say that it is the only reason I have not 
used drugs because that would be false, but I will say that it is a factor. I 
have no intention of ever using illegal drugs and hate just the thought of my 
mind being altered by them or even the euphoric feeling they may produce. 
My feelings toward having an altered state-of-mind are so strong that I rarely 
even drink alcohol. I have [consumed] alcohol maybe 5 times in the past 5 
years. I even quit smoking cigarettes 3 years ago (after smoking them for 
at least 12 years) because I started hating them so much! I would just like 
to add that I never stole to try to pay for drugs or anything like that but I 
know that often people with drug problems will do such things. I know that 
                                                          
4 AE A (Plea Agreement and Order, dated November 12, 2015). 
 
5 AE B (Community Service Completion Report, dated February 8, 2016). 
 
6 AE C (Receipt, dated August 30, 2016); AE H (Receipt, dated October 14, 2016). 
 
7 The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is the standard diagnostic tool for epidemiology, health 
management and clinical purposes. 
 
8 AE D (Medical Notes, various dates); AE E (Procedure Notes, various dates); AE F (Medical Notes, various 
dates). 
 
9 Tr. at 39-40. 
 
10 GE 1, supra note 1, at 51-52. 
 
5 
                                      
 
continued use of drugs would have eventually taken everything I loved from 
me and it sends chills up my spine sometimes when I think about the fact 
that it could have happened to me. I feel like I lost a lot of time because of 
my use of this terrible substance and I refuse to lose even another minute 
to drugs. I deal with my problems in normal ways now and I plan on making 
the next 50 years of my life as drug-free as the last 5. 
 
Character References 
 
Applicant’s team lead and several coworkers are supportive of Applicant’s 
application for a security clearance. He is considered an enthusiastic, excellent, eager, 
reliable, diligent, dependable, supportive, cooperative, helpful, level-headed, and 
dedicated team member. He shares his skills, takes initiative, and gets along well with 
everyone. One test engineer is also a friend, and they share common extracurricular 
hobbies and interests. .Applicant’s personality is consistent in and out of the work place.11 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”12 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”13  
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
                                                          
11 AE G (Character References, various dates). 
 
12 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
13 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”14 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.15  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”16  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”17 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set out in AG ¶ 24:       
 
                                                          
14 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other 
substances that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in 
a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological 
impairment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any "controlled substance" as defined in 21 U.S.C. 
802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline 
to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions under AG ¶ 25 that could raise 
security concerns in this case: “(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
and (d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social worker) of 
substance use disorder.” 
 
 Applicant purchased, possessed, and used Oxycodone without a 
prescription from January 2002 until November 2009. He was diagnosed by a duly 
qualified medical professional as opioid dependent, continuous. AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), 
and (d) have been established. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 26 that 
could mitigate security concerns arising from Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse: AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
AG ¶ 26 (b): 
 
the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome 
this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, 
but not limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs 
were used; and (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain 
from all drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of 
national security eligibility. 
 
In addition, the “satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without 
recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional,” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 26 (d). 
  
 
8 
                                      
 
I have concluded that AG ¶¶ 26(b), and 26(d) apply, and AG ¶ 26(a) partially 
applies. Applicant’s substance abuse took place frequently, at times on a daily basis, 
when he purchased, possessed, and used Oxycodone without a prescription from 
January 2002 until November 2009. He stopped using Oxycodone nearly eight years ago 
when he decided to seek medical assistance. He was diagnosed with opioid dependence, 
continuous and he was prescribed Suboxone.® Applicant was under the continuous 
medical supervision of the clinic from November 12, 2009 until at least April 30, 2015, 
during which time he was administered routine drug tests and given physical 
examinations. He also attended several required sessions of AA. Applicant’s last 
prescription for Suboxone® expired in early June 2015, and it was never renewed as he 
no longer needed it. Applicant does not have any cravings for Oxycodone.  
 
Applicant has dissociated himself from known drug users. The factors which led 
him to use Oxycodone no longer exist: being with his ex-fiancée, the pressures 
associated with beginning college again, a newborn child, financial strain, and his 
grandfather’s terminal illness. Applicant’s intentions regarding the future use of any illegal 
substance or medication that was not prescribed for him is unambiguous. He has 
provided substantial evidence of actions he has taken to overcome his drug problem, and 
he has established a clear pattern of abstinence. Applicant’s nearly eight years of 
sustained abstinence, and his intentions to remain abstinent should be encouraged. 
Applicant has presented a stable lifestyle with his wife and child, as well as a satisfactory 
employment record. Despite the negative aspects of his earlier behavior and actions, his 
more recent positive actions – for the past eight years – under the circumstances, no 
longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
 
The guideline notes several conditions under AG ¶ 31 that could raise security 
concerns in this case: AG ¶ 31(b) “evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible 
allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted” and AG ¶ 31(c) 
“individual is currently on parole or probation.” 
 
In April 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of a controlled 
substance.  He was eventually convicted of the charge, fined $4,500, and placed on 
supervised probation for two years. In September 2013, Applicant was arrested, and 
charged with unlawful possession of a controlled substance and attempt to elude. The 
charge of unlawful possession of a controlled substance was reduced to illegal 
possession of a prescription drug, and the charge of attempt to elude was dismissed. On 
his plea, Applicant was convicted of the charge, fined, incarcerated for 365 days 
(suspended for the term of probation, and given credit for time served), ordered to perform 
20 hours of community service, and placed on unsupervised probation for two years, 
 
9 
                                      
 
commencing on November 12, 2015. It appears that Applicant is still on probation. 
Applicant completed his community service and paid off his fine in 2016. AG ¶¶ 31(b) and 
31(c) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 32 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from Criminal Conduct: AG ¶ 32(a) “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and AG ¶ 32(d) “there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or 
probation, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement.” 
 
 I have concluded that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. Over ten years ago, Applicant 
engaged in criminal behavior that led to his arrest. He was convicted, fined $4,500, and 
placed on supervised probation for two years. Nearly four years ago, he was again 
arrested for criminal behavior. He was convicted, fined, incarcerated for 365 days 
(suspended for the term of probation, and given credit for time served), ordered to perform 
20 hours of community service, and placed on unsupervised probation for two years. Both 
incidents involved police stops and drugs. Applicant acknowledged his 2007 criminal 
behavior. Although he entered a plea of guilty to a reduced charge in 2013, he steadfastly 
denied the allegations for which he was initially arrested and the one for which he was 
subsequently convicted. Four facts associated with the 2013 incident stand out: (1) the 
prescription drugs that were found on the passenger were prescribed for that individual; 
(2) no drugs were found on Applicant or elsewhere in his car; (3) the police authorities 
wanted Applicant to furnish evidence against the passenger, but he was unable to do so; 
and (4) Applicant was placed on unsupervised probation. The first three of those factors 
indicate that unusual circumstances were present, and the fourth factor seems to be the 
result of those other factors. 
 
Two criminal incidents during a lifetime of 54 years is still two incidents too many. 
However, Applicant has turned his life around and now has a stable lifestyle; he has 
rehabilitated himself by avoiding further criminal activity for the past four years; he has 
established himself with his employer and coworkers, and is well-liked; and he has been 
a good and loving husband and father. And, not to be overlooked, Applicant has been 
abstinent since November 2009 – nearly eight years – and he no longer associates with 
substance abusers. I recognize that for the next three months, Applicant will still be on 
unsupervised probation. However, under the circumstances of this case, I do not consider 
his brief period of continued supervision to constitute a mandated disqualification for a 
security clearance. Applicant’s intentions regarding the future use of any illegal substance 
or medication that was not prescribed for him and other criminal conduct are 
unambiguous, and so is his vow to disassociate himself from other lawbreakers.  Despite 
the negative aspects of his earlier behavior and actions, his more recent positive actions, 
under the circumstances, no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment.  
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.18   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant 
purchased, possessed, and used Oxycodone without a prescription from January 2002 
until November 2009. He was diagnosed by a duly qualified medical professional as opioid 
dependent, continuous. He was arrested and convicted in 2006 and 2013 for drug-related 
charges.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling 
protected information. Applicant purchased, possessed, and used Oxycodone without a 
prescription from January 2002 until November 2009. He was diagnosed as opioid 
dependent, continuous. Applicant candidly acknowledged his lengthy and frequent illegal 
association with Oxycodone. He stopped using Oxycodone nearly eight years ago when 
he decided to seek medical assistance. Applicant was under the continuous medical 
supervision of the clinic from November 12, 2009 until at least April 30, 2015, during which 
time he was administered routine drug tests and given physical examinations. He also 
attended several required sessions of AA. Applicant’s last prescription for Suboxone® 
expired in early June 2015, and it was never renewed as he no longer needed it. Applicant 
does not have any cravings for Oxycodone.  
 
Applicant has dissociated himself from known drug users. The factors which led 
him to use Oxycodone no longer exist. Applicant’s intentions regarding the future use of 
any illegal substance or medication that was not prescribed for him are unambiguous. He 
                                                          
18 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
has provided substantial evidence of actions he has taken to overcome his drug problem, 
and he has established a clear pattern of abstinence. Applicant has presented a stable 
lifestyle with his wife and child, as well as a satisfactory employment record. He is within 
three months of being released from unsupervised probation.  Despite the negative 
aspects of his earlier behavior and actions, his more recent positive actions – abstinence 
for the past eight years, and no criminal behavior or arrests for nearly four years – under 
the circumstances, no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement and 
substance misuse and criminal conduct. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
