 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case No. 15-016021 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the alleged financial and personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. National security eligibility for a position of trust is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006; and the AG effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after June 8, 2017.2  
                                                 
1 This case was initially processed as an ISCR case. It was subsequently converted to an ADP in July 2016. 
(Case File.) 
2I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 On April 28, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was mailed to 
Applicant on June 9, 2016, and received by him on July 20, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit 
documents or objections to the Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 through 7 are 
admitted into evidence. On June 7, 2017, the Department of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegations contained in the SOR, but 
instead referred to attached documents. His answers are construed as denials. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant is 60 years old and married. He served on active military duty from 1976 
to October 2005, when he retired. He completed a bachelor’s degree in 2011. He started 
working for his current employer, a defense contractor, in 2012. He had worked for other 
defense contractors prior to this position. (GE 3.)  
  
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from September 2015, February 2015, and 
November 2015, the SOR alleged seven delinquent debts that became delinquent 
between 2009 and 2012, and totaled about $31,000. (GE 4, GE 5, GE 6.)  
 
 Applicant provided proof that he paid and resolved two of the seven debts. In 
January 2015, he resolved the $7,000 judgment, entered in 2010 and alleged in ¶ 1.b 
(Item 2.) In April 2016, he resolved the $12,322 debt alleged in ¶ 1.e. (Item 2.) He did not 
provide credible documentation that he paid, resolved, or disputed the other five debts.  
  
 Applicant did not disclose the 2010 judgment entered against him or any of the 
other six delinquent debts in the security clearance application (SCA) that he submitted 
in November 2012. (GE 1.) In January 2016, Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigator during a background investigation. He discussed the status of his delinquent 
debts, including those subsequently alleged in the SOR, with the investigator. (Item 7.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
                                                 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 
7 of EO 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant 
shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 
4 
 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Beginning in 2009, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he has been 
unable or unwilling to fully resolve. The evidence raises the above trustworthiness 
concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Five of the alleged delinquent debts are ongoing, unresolved, and continue to cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. There is no evidence to 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) because Applicant did not provide an explanation 
of the circumstances underlying his financial problems. He did not submit evidence that 
he participated in credit or financial counseling. There are no clear indications that his five 
old SOR-alleged debts are under control. The evidence does not establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant paid and resolved two debts, which demonstrated a good-
faith effort to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.e. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to 
those debts. Applicant did not provide evidence to substantiate a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the trustworthiness concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose delinquent debts and a 2010 judgment in his 2012 SCA. 
He provided no explanation for not disclosing the requested information. Consequently, I 
find he deliberately omitted disclosing delinquent debts in his SCA. The evidence 
establishes the above disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides a condition that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns raised 
under this guideline:  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under the above condition. 
The failure to disclose requested information is not a minor offense and casts doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability and judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 60-year-old 
married man, who retired from military service after 30 years. During an interview in 
January 2013, he was placed on notice that the Government had concerns about his 
delinquent debts. In April 2016, the Government issued a SOR to him, alleging delinquent 
debts and the non-disclosure of them. In July 2016, the Government’s FORM specifically 
informed him that he failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the allegations in the 
SOR, and gave him 30 days to submit additional information. He did not do that. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a position of trust. He failed to meet his burden to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under the guidelines for financial 
considerations and personal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:               AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph: 1.a:    Against Applicant 
                    
                      Subparagraph 1.b:                          For Applicant 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.c and 1d:     Against Applicant  
 
              Subparagraph 1.e:                 For Applicant 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:      Against Applicant 
 
                   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:       Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. National eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                               
  
 
                                              
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
