 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-07427 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not submit any information to overcome the security concerns 
raised by the Government’s adverse information about his financial problems. 
Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 3, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators determined that it 
was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have access 
to classified information. On April 8, 2015, Applicant submitted an e-QIP to renew his 
security clearance eligibility. After reviewing another background investigation, DOD 
 
2 
 
adjudicators could not determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
On July 8, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 At the 
time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my 
recommended decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On August 10, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on September 13, 2016, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant did not provide any 
additional information in response to the FORM. I received the case on July 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $4,910 for ten 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.j). The $2,215 debt at SOR 1.d represents 
the amount past due on Applicant’s mortgage. If that mortgage were now in default, the 
total debt at issue in this case would reflect the entire $135,330 loan balance. Applicant 
admitted all of the SOR allegations without explanation or other additional information. 
(FORM, Item 2) In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2009. In December 2008, he completed technical training in aircraft 
maintenance. Applicant has been steadily employed since July 2004, except for the 
period April 2007 through October 2007. At that time, he was moving and starting 
technical school. Applicant and his wife have been married since June 2005. Together 
they are raising two children, ages 9 and 12. 
 
 When Applicant started his current job, he applied for and received eligibility for a 
security clearance. In his September 2009 e-QIP, he disclosed several past-due or 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on eight enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 - 8). 
5 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
delinquent debts, and he provided explanations for his financial problems at the time. In 
his April 2015 e-QIP, submitted for renewal of his clearance, Applicant again disclosed 
delinquent or past-due debts. In April 2015 and April 2016, the Government obtained 
credit reports that support the SOR allegations in this case. (FORM, Items 3 – 5) 
 
 One of the debts listed in the April 2015 credit report was the past-due mortgage 
payment alleged in SOR 1.d. In March 2014, Applicant suffered an on-the-job injury and 
was unable to work for about eight weeks. During that time, he received only about 25 
percent of his regular pay. Applicant fell behind in his mortgage payments, but in late 
2014, he was able to obtain a mortgage modification to stave off foreclosure 
proceedings. On March 13, 2015, Applicant’s employer notified the DOD CAF through 
the Joint Personnel Adjudications System (JPAS) that Applicant had reported he again 
was in arrears on his mortgage. (FORM, Items 5 – 8) 
 
 The only explanation for Applicant’s financial problems in this record is his 
statement to a government investigator during a May 6, 2015 subject interview. 
Applicant cited the temporary loss of income after his March 2014 injury, and his lack of 
attention to household finances, which his wife had been managing. Applicant claimed 
he did not know the mortgage and other bills were going unpaid. He also stated his 
intention to be more involved in their finances thereafter. (FORM, Item 5)  
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
                                                 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.10 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.11 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s debts reasonably raised the 
security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant has been experiencing significant financial problems since at least 
2009, when he first received a security clearance. He has not addressed any of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. This information requires application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts 
                                                 
8 Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 Directive, E3.1.15. 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
11 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
regardless of the ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). 
 
 I have also considered whether the record supports application of any of the AG 
¶ 20 mitigating conditions. I conclude it does not. Even though Applicant experienced a 
temporary income reduction in the first half of 2014, he did not establish that he dealt 
with the adverse financial consequences in a responsible way. Despite obtaining a 
mortgage modification later that year, he again fell behind in his mortgage a few months 
later. Applicant did not provide any information in response to the SOR or to the FORM 
regarding efforts to resolve his debts and improve his financial condition. Applicant’s 
financial problems pre-date his first application for clearance. It was incumbent on 
Applicant to provide current information regarding his finances in order to mitigate the 
Government’s security concerns.  
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Doubts about Applicant’s 
suitability remain because of his longstanding financial problems and his lack of action 
to pay or otherwise resolve his debts. Because protection of the interests of national 
security is the principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be 
resolved against the granting of access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
