 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06555 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial issues and alcohol problems after her divorce. 
She made a good faith effort to pay or resolve her debts, and mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns. She took steps to curtail her alcohol issues, and they 
are unlikely to recur. She mitigated the alcohol involvement security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline G, alcohol involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (Exec. Ord.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
(AG). SEAD 4 became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date, including this one.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of 
the new AGs did not affect my decision in this case.  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 23, 2016. She submitted documents 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE N and requested a written decision in 
lieu of a hearing. On August 29, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant an 
amendment to the SOR. She responded on October 29, 2016 and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 20, 2017, scheduling the hearing 
for July 10, 2017, by video teleconference, with the agreement of both parties. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered documents which 
were marked Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. GE 1, and GE 3 through 7 were 
admitted into evidence.2 GE 2 was not admitted.3 Applicant testified and submitted 
documents which I marked as AE A through AE W, a sequence following the 
attachments to her answer. AE A through AE W were admitted without objection.4 The 
record was held open until July 28, 2017 to enable Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted several post-hearing documents which were marked 
collectively as AE X and admitted without objection.5 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 18, 2017.  
  
Amendment to the SOR 
 
 The Government’s amendment to the SOR added the following allegation under 
Guideline G:  
 
2.c.  You have consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of 
intoxication, from approximately 1982 through November 2014.  
 
                                                          
1 At the hearing, Applicant confirmed that she received a copy of SEAD 4 with the Notice of Hearing. (Tr. 
12-14)   
 
2 Applicant objected to GE 4, a February 28, 2015 credit report, because it was out of date. Tr. 32-33. She 
did not object to admission of GE 1, GE 3, GE 5, GE 6, or GE 7.  
 
3 GE 2 is the unauthenticated summary of Applicant’s June 8, 2015 background interview, part of her 
personnel background report of investigation (ROI). Under ¶ E3.1.20, an ROI is admissible only through 
an authenticating witness. Department Counsel offered GE 2, but Applicant declined to sufficiently 
authenticate it during my questioning her about it, so GE 2 was not admitted, and I have not considered it. 
(Tr. 30)  
   
4 The pre-hearing e-mail correspondence between myself and the parties concerning scheduling and 
submission of hearing exhibits is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s discovery letter 
is marked as HE II.  
 
5 On August 4, 2017, Applicant submitted one additional document, which I have included as part of AE X 
and admitted.  
 
3 
 
Department Counsel presented the amendment, and Applicant’s written response, at 
the start of the hearing. Applicant denied the allegation and provided a narrative 
explanation. The SOR was amended without objection. (Tr. 14-18) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i, and ¶¶ 2.a-2.b, with explanations and 
documents. She denied SOR ¶ 2.c. Her admissions and other comments are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She was married from 1995 to 2011, and she remarried 
in December 2012. She has a 20-year-old daughter from her first marriage. She has a 
high school education and is pursuing an associate’s degree. (Tr. 49-50; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant was employed by a large internet company from 2000 to December 
2007, when was laid off due to a reduction in force. She was then unemployed until 
March 2008, when she began working for a defense contractor. She worked there for 
two years, until she relocated in 2010. She worked for another contractor for almost 
three years, until she was laid off in February 2013. She was then unemployed until she 
was hired by her current employer, in August 2013. She has held a secret clearance 
since January 2009. (Tr. 11, 55-56; GE 1)  
 
 Applicant testified that her marriage ended because her husband became 
abusive. Her financial problems began after her divorce. She was employed in the 
defense industry at the time but was unable to maintain their home on her salary alone 
after he moved out. She left her job and moved in with her mother, who lives in another 
part of the state. (Tr. 51-52)  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in February 2015. 
(GE 1). She disclosed SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e. (GE 1 at 37-39). The nine debts 
alleged in the SOR total about $18,070. All are listed on Applicant’s February 2015 
credit report. Three of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.d) are listed on her February 
2016 credit report. (GE 4, GE 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a $1,588 judgment issued against Applicant in December 2013 in 
favor of a university. (GE 4) She signed up for a class while working for a previous 
employer. She believed her employer was going to pay for the class but they did not do 
so. Applicant was not able to take the class because her father was in a car accident. 
He died two months later. (Tr. at 52; GE 1 at 38). The debt has now been paid. (AE P)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a $2,237 judgment issued against Applicant in April 2010 by a 
collection agency for a retail store. The debt concerns a household appliance. Applicant 
testified that the store took the appliance back when it was discovered that it would not 
fit in her kitchen. She did not receive any paperwork regarding the appliance showing 
whether she owed anything on it after it was returned. Applicant contacted the creditor 
after the hearing and paid $2,619 to settle the account. (Tr. 58-63; AE B, AE X) 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($172) and 1.g ($1,657) are medical debts in collection. The creditors 
are not specifically identified on Applicant’s credit reports. She admitted each debt in 
her answer but also wrote letters to the major credit bureaus indicating that she had no 
information from her local hospital that she owed them any money (AE C, AE G). 
Applicant became aware during her testimony that these debts became past due before 
she relocated, so she had been trying to resolve them with the wrong hospital. (Tr. 65-
66; 71-74) After the hearing, she settled SOR ¶ 1.g for $1,172. She was unable to verify 
SOR ¶ 1.c. (AE X)  
 
SOR ¶1.d is a $601 debt in collection to a phone company. (GE 4) Applicant 
settled the debt in May 2016 for $300. (AE D) She testified that she still has an account 
with the same phone company, and it is current. (Tr. 67) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a $3,681 charged-off debt to a credit card company. Applicant paid 
the debt in September 2014. (GE 4, GE 5, AE E).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a past due debt of $7,577 related to the mortgage on the home 
Applicant owned with her first husband. (GE 4) She provided a letter from the creditor 
showing a zero balance on the account, as of May 2016. (AE F)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($417) and 1.i ($140) are medical debts in collection. (GE 4). When 
Applicant sought to resolve the debts with the creditors, she was told the accounts were 
closed and no longer collectible under the state statute of limitations. (Tr. 75-76; AE H, 
AE I). Applicant provided documentation after the hearing that the debts have now been 
paid. (AE X) 
 
 Applicant’s current annual salary is about $80,000. Her husband works for a 
nearby university. His annual salary is about $50,000. They own their home and are 
current on their $798 monthly mortgage. She testified that she has no other delinquent 
debts beyond those in the SOR. She has two credit cards with small balances. She 
pays them off each month to build up her credit. She is current on her monthly car 
payments of $335. Applicant and her husband maintain a monthly budget and monitor it 
closely. She described her husband as a “wizard with finances.” She testified that they 
follow the budget approach of Dave Ramsey, and try to have money set aside for 
anything bought on credit so they can pay it off. They also have a financial advisor. 
Applicant testified that she has about $1,000 in her checking account and about $5,000 
in savings. She has about $25,900 in her employer’s 401k plan. Her taxes are current. 
(Tr. 97-103, 124; AE T, AE U) 
 
Guideline G 
 
 Applicant first consumed alcohol in high school, in about 1982. She also 
consumed alcohol in college. She testified that her first husband and his family, who are 
French, drank alcohol with their meals often. She did not consume alcohol during her 
first marriage (1995-2011), in part because she wanted a child. She began drinking to 
excess when living with her mother after her divorce. She would drink wine at home, 
often when she was alone. (Tr. 51, 104-106; Answer to SOR Amendment)   
 
5 
 
 In September 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI). (SOR ¶ 2.a) She had consumed three or four glasses of wine on an 
empty stomach at home before driving. She went to an airport about an hour away from 
her home to pick up a friend. She was pulled over after she drove over a curb. She was 
arrested after a sobriety test showed her blood alcohol level was about 0.15. (Tr. 78-80. 
GE 3, GE 7)  
 
 In November 2014, Applicant went to a college football game with friends. During 
pregame tailgating, she was offered a large alcoholic mixed drink, which she consumed 
on an empty stomach. She was intoxicated by the time she entered the stadium, and 
the police asked her to leave. She scuffled with a policewoman, and she was then taken 
into custody. Because she was uncooperative, she was ordered held in jail for three 
days before her bond hearing. (Tr. 84-86; 112-113; GE 1)  
 
 Applicant was charged with felony assault on a police officer and public 
intoxication. (SOR ¶ 2.b) In March 2015, she pleaded guilty to a reduced misdemeanor 
assault charge and was sentenced to 12 months’ probation. The public intoxication 
charge was dismissed. (GE 3; GE 7; AE K)   
 
 At the time of her second arrest, Applicant was awaiting trial for the DWI charge. 
She acknowledged at hearing that she had been given paperwork in court indicating 
that she was not allowed to drink alcohol while her criminal case was pending. (Tr. 111-
112).  
 
 For the DWI, Applicant received a 180-day suspended jail sentence and 12 
months of probation, from March 2015 to March 2016. Her driver’s license was also 
suspended for 12 months, from November 2014 to November 2015. She had an 
interlock ignition device for six months. She was also ordered to attend an alcohol 
safety awareness program. In March 2016, Applicant successfully completed probation 
for both offenses. (Tr. 110-114; AE J, AE N; GE 1; GE 7) 
 
 At the time of her offenses, Applicant was also taking a prescription medication. 
She did not believe the medication was working, so she asked her doctor to reduce the 
dosage. By the time of the second arrest, she had stopped taking it altogether. 
Applicant believed the medication had an impact on her tolerance for alcohol. Applicant 
told her doctor about her two arrests, and went back on the medication. She now knows 
not to consume alcohol when she is taking the medication. (Answer; Tr. 107-110)  
  
 Beginning in January 2015, Applicant attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) for 
about 18 months. She stopped going because she found it was not working for her. She 
has also worked with and mentored other women with alcohol issues in a similar 12-
step program that she has found more useful. (Tr. 87-89, 115; AE J, AE K) She also 
attends church regularly and has found value in continuing with pastoral counseling 
there. (Tr. 114-115; AE M)  
 
 Since her arrests, Applicant has significantly curtailed her alcohol consumption. 
In recent months, she had a beer at a baseball game and a glass of wine at a concert. 
 
6 
 
Her tolerance for alcohol has lessened, and Applicant believes it now takes less alcohol 
than it used to for her to become intoxicated. (Tr. 114-119) 
 
 Applicant recognized that her alcohol consumption was “poor judgment on my 
part, especially [while] holding a clearance.” (Tr. 48) She considers that her arrests and 
the clearance hearing process have been a “life-changing event” that affected both her 
family and herself. (Tr. 48) She took to heart her probation officer’s advice that she had 
too much to lose if she did not reform. (Tr. 91; AE K; Answer to Amendment) There is 
no indication that Applicant was formally diagnosed as having an alcohol use disorder.  
 
 Applicant’s husband testified that she has made great strides in curbing her 
drinking and improving her finances. (Tr. 123-127) A close friend testified that she called 
Applicant to care for her children and baby granddaughter in the middle of the night 
when the friend had a family emergency, and that she considers Applicant trustworthy 
and reliable. (Tr. 130) 
 
A former co-worker attested to Applicant’s professionalism and leadership skills 
as a mentor. Her minister wrote that Applicant was respectful of privacy, sensitive 
information, as well as rules and regulations. She is a trusted leader and mentor in her 
church community, and is reliable and trustworthy. (AE L, AE M).  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.6 As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”7 
 
 The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
                                                          
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”).  
 
7 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
7 
 
proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debts after her divorce. Her debts are sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
8 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are directly linked to her divorce. This was a 
circumstance beyond her control. She left her job, and moved to a new location with her 
daughter. She moved in with her mother and began a new life. It took Applicant some 
time to pay or resolve her debts, but she undertook responsible action to pay them, and 
she provided extensive documentation of her efforts to do so. All of her SOR debts have 
now been paid except for SOR ¶ 1.c, a small medical debt she was unable to verify. AG 
¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) both apply. 
 
 Applicant receives and follows financial advice from reputable sources. She and 
her husband have a budget that they follow closely. Her delinquent debts are resolved. 
Her financial problems are unlikely to recur and no longer cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) apply.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set forth in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
 
9 
 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with an alcohol 
use disorder; and  
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.  
 
 Applicant had no history of excessive alcohol consumption until after her divorce. 
She began drinking alcohol to excess after she divorced and moved in with her mother, 
in another part of the state. She was arrested twice during a three-month period in the 
fall of 2014. Both offenses came after she drank alcohol to excess, on an empty 
stomach.  
 
 In September 2014, she was arrested for DUI. While that court case was 
pending, and while she was under court orders not to consume alcohol, she became 
intoxicated and belligerent at a college football game, in November 2014. She had a 
physical altercation with police, and was charged with felony assault on a police officer 
and public intoxication. The felony charge was later reduced to a misdemeanor, and the 
public intoxication charge was dismissed. The above AGs both apply.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol to excess after her divorce, when she and her 
daughter moved in with her mother. Her drinking continued after she remarried. She 
had two alcohol-related arrests within a three-month period in the fall of 2014. Both 
were similar incidents, in that she exercised poor judgment by drinking to excess on an 
empty stomach. However, she completed the required alcohol safety awareness class 
and successfully completed the one-year probation period. She was “scared straight” by 
the experience of her arrests and recognizes that she had too much to lose if she did 
not alter her behavior. She participated in Alcoholics Anonymous for 18 months, and 
has continued to participate in similar programs. She also pursues pastoral counseling 
through her church. She has significantly curtailed her drinking. She now drinks only 
rarely, and to moderation. 
 
 Applicant’s arrests occurred during an isolated period in her life. There is no 
evidence that she engaged in similar behavior before the fall of 2014, or since. She 
 
10 
 
acknowledged her behavior and the poor behavior which led to it, and took steps to 
change. Her two arrests occurred almost three years ago. She has altered her behavior 
significantly and there is little risk of recurrence. AG ¶¶ 23 (a) and 23 (b) apply to 
mitigate the alcohol involvement security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(c):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F and Guideline G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant experienced financial and alcohol problems after her divorce. She 
undertook reasonable, good-faith efforts to pay and resolve her debts. Her financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. I observed her demeanor during the hearing and found 
her to be a credible witness. She recognizes the seriousness of her actions, and 
realizes that she has much to lose if she does not continue to guard against further 
alcohol problems in the future. Her alcohol issues occurred during an isolated period in 
her life and she has taken significant steps to prevent them from recurring.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns under both financial considerations and alcohol 
involvement. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
11 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
