 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-05864 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 10, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to mitigate the concerns related to foreign influence raised by his relatives in India. His 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 31, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). (Item 5.) On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence), and C (Foreign 
Preference). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (EO), 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 27, 2016. (Item 4.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 4.) On August 15, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on September 30, 2016, and received by him on October 7, 
2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in a submission dated October 27, 2016, 
received by DOHA on October 31, 2016. He did not object to Items 1 through 6. 
Applicant also submitted additional information in his FORM response, to which 
Department Counsel had no objection. DOHA assigned the case to me on July 11, 
2017. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s response to the FORM 
is marked as exhibit (AE) A and is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 1. In the FORM, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to India. Department Counsel provided a seven-page summary of the 
facts, supported by ten Government documents pertaining to India, identified as Item 6. 
The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters 
of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
 2. Department Counsel made a motion in the FORM to amend the SOR by 
withdrawing “SOR paragraph 1 and subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b,” in order to conform to 
the evidence, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17. Applicant expressed no objections to the 
amendment and previously denied these allegations in his Answer. The motion to 
amend is granted. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He was born in India. He immigrated to the United 
States in December 1997, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2008. He 
attended college in India, earning a bachelor’s degree in 1979 and master’s degrees in 
1983 and 1985. He married his wife, a naturalized U.S. citizen, in India prior to his 
immigration to the United States. He has one adult daughter who was born in India and 
is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has been working for his present employer, a U.S. 
Government contractor, since November 2013. He worked in the commercial sector and 
for a state government in the United States from December 1998 to May 2012. He 
worked for a different Federal contractor from May 2012 to November 2013. Applicant 
held a position of public trust in that job. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant cancelled his Indian passport in 2008. (Item 4; AE A.) He maintains a 
Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) card. (Item 4; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant admits that his mother is a citizen and resident of India. (Item 4.) She is 
approximately 80 years old and resides with Applicant’s sister in India. She is supported 
by a “family pension” she receives as a result of her deceased husband’s work as a 
state government employee in the “irrigation department.” (AE A.) Applicant estimated 
that he has weekly telephonic contact with his mother on his SF-86. (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant admits that his sister is a citizen and resident of India. (Item 4.) She is a 
50-year-old homemaker. She cares for Applicant’s mother. She is married. Her husband 
works for a state-run auto insurance company. They have one child. Applicant 
communicates with his sister and her family once or twice per month by telephone. (AE 
A; Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant admits that his brother-in-law (his wife’s brother) is a citizen and 
resident of India. (Item 4.) He is a retired accountant for a private firm. Applicant has 
telephonic contact with him on a quarterly basis. (AE A; Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to India in 2004, 2007 to 2008, 2010, and 2013, for 
approximately 11 to 20 days on each visit, to spend time with friends and family there. 
(Item 5.) He traveled to India in 2010 and 2013 using his U.S. passport. (AE A; Item 4.) 
 
India1 
 
India is the world’s largest democracy and is the world’s second most populous 
country. India is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral 
parliament.  
 
                                                 
1 Item 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
India has a history of being involved in criminal espionage and is an active 
collector of U.S. economic and proprietary information. India remained on the Office of 
the U.S. Trade Representative’s Priority watch list in 2015, based on its history of 
trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy - including one of the highest rates of 
video piracy in the world, and concerns regarding patents and regulatory data 
protection. Of particular concern is counterfeit pharmaceuticals produced in India and 
shipped to the United States, posing serious risk to Americans consumers. There have 
been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, 
dual-use technology to India, including technology and equipment which were 
determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security 
services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology.  
 
A 2015 Human Rights Report on India reflects that the most significant human 
rights problems in India involve police and security forces who engage in extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of 
accountability permeates the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere 
in which human rights violations go unpunished. A number of violent attacks were 
committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. In addition, a number of 
terrorist groups operate in regions of India, which makes travel to these regions 
dangerous.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
 
 
5 
 
 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s mother, sister, and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of India. 
India is the world’s largest democracy. But it also continues to have some human rights 
issues, has been victimized by terrorist attacks, and has a history of seeking restricted 
dual-use technology, which has been illegally exported to India from the United States. 
This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.2 It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and 
(e) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
                                                 
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant and his 
family members are vulnerable to coercion. The risk of coercion, pressure, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon that government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious problem 
in the country with crime or terrorism. In this case, there is evidence that India illegally 
targets U.S. technology, which raises a security concern about Applicant’s relationship 
with his mother, sister, and brother in-law. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has limited application.  
 
Applicant produced some evidence to establish AG ¶ 8(b). He has lived in the 
United States since 1997. He has worked for U.S. companies since at least 1998. He 
became a naturalized citizen in 2008. His wife and daughter are naturalized U.S. 
citizens. Based on those connections to the United States, there is some indication that 
he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not have application to the security concerns raised as a result of 
Applicant’s contacts with his mother, sister, and brother-in-law in India because those 
contacts are frequent and not casual. His communications have been consistent over 
the years, including multiple trips to India to visit family and friends there.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old man, who was born in India and has lived in the United 
States for about 20 years. He has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2008. His 
spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Those are facts that weigh in favor of granting 
Applicant a security clearance. However, Applicant’s ties to India outweigh those 
factors. Over the past 20 years, Applicant has maintained strong connections to India 
through his family there. He has communicated regularly with family members over the 
years and visited them in India. While his ongoing contacts with other family members 
commendably demonstrate devotion and affection for his family, those actions raise 
security concerns and potential conflicts of interest that are not easily mitigated. 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to present sufficient evidence of deep and 
longstanding relationships in the United States to show that he would resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Foreign Influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:        WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.b:  Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
