 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     ------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07472 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. The action is based on foreign influence concerns due 
to Applicant’s family ties to Iran via his marriage to an Iranian citizen who is living and 
working in the United States as a lawful immigrant. For the reasons discussed below, 
this case is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 Format) on February 19, 2015. This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. Thereafter, on June 16, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence. The sole 
 
2 
 
allegation concerned his cohabitation with his then girlfriend who is an Iranian citizen 
living in the United States on a student visa.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 25, 2016; he admitted the allegation; he 
explained that he married his girlfriend in February 2016; and she had applied to have 
her immigration status adjusted to permanent resident alien, commonly referred to as a 
green card. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
The hearing took place as scheduled on December 7, 2016. The hearing 
transcript was received on December 15, 2016. Post-hearing, Applicant submitted 
additional documentation showing that his spouse had obtained a green card on March 
1, 2017. Without objection, that documentation is admitted as Exhibit E.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
I took administrative or official notice, which is similar to judicial notice, of certain 
facts concerning the country of Iran per Department Counsel’s written request.1 The 
essential facts about Iran are discussed below. 
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer/technician employed by a federal contractor. 
He is seeking to obtain a security clearance of the first time in the defense industry. He 
has worked for the same federal contractor since October 2009. He was born in Cuba 
and immigrated to the United States as a young child with his parents. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1987. His educational background includes an electronics 
technician diploma awarded in 1990 and a bachelor’s degree in applied science and 
technology (with a concentration in engineering technology) awarded in 2001. His 
employment history includes honorable military service in the U.S. Army during the 
1980s. His first marriage ended in divorce in 2009.  
 
In his February 2015 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he 
was cohabitating with a woman who is a citizen of Iran.2 He explained that she was 
residing in the United States lawfully on a student visa. He provided additional 
information about her during the March 2015 background investigation.3  
 
Applicant and the woman married in February 2016.4 Based on the marriage, in 
March 2016, Applicant and his spouse applied to have her immigration status adjusted 
to permanent resident alien as well as to obtain employment authorization.5 Immigration 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 3.  
 
2 Exhibit 1.  
 
3 Exhibit 2.  
 
4 Exhibit A.  
 
5 Exhibits B, C, and D. 
 
3 
 
authorities approved the request granting her permanent resident alien status as of 
March 1, 2017.6 She intends to apply for U.S. citizenship as soon as allowed by law.7   
 
Both Applicant and his spouse testified at the hearing, and I found their testimony 
to be credible and worthy of belief. Applicant’s spouse, age 38, explained that she 
entered the United States in August 2013 on a student visa to pursue a MBA degree 
with a focus on health-care and information management. Previously, she obtained a 
bachelor’s degree in industrial engineering from an Iranian university. She then worked 
in Iran for a multinational oil and gas corporation as well as a multinational 
pharmaceutical corporation.   
 
Applicant met his future spouse in-person during July 2014 at a social event for 
singles. After dating for a period, they began living together in February 2015. She 
completed the MBA program in May 2015 and then had an internship with a software 
company working in the health-care industry. She is now working on her own start-up 
company in the health-care industry. She has not returned to Iran since her departure in 
2013.8 She had planned to visit her parents in Iran in about September 2016, but she 
decided not to do so in light of her pending immigration petition.9 She does not intend to 
travel to Iran in the future due to her understanding of security issues, and she will 
instead meet her parents somewhere in between, such as Italy since she has a brother 
living there.10 
 
Applicant’s spouse’s father, mother, brother, and sister are citizens of Iran. Both 
her mother and father are retired and living in Iran. Her mother, age 59, had her own 
business. Her father, age 74, was a mathematics teacher in a local high school. From 
time to time, her father helps her sister who is an architect working in real estate 
development. Her sister is married to a civil engineer employed by a communications 
company, although he is also involved in the same real estate development business. 
Her brother is pursuing a Ph.D. at a university in Italy, he is married to an Iranian citizen, 
and they are seeking Italian citizenship. She described her family as small-town people 
who are not in favor of the current regime in Iran, nor were they in favor of the last 
regime. She communicates with her parents in Iran via Skype, speaking with her father 
almost every other day and her mother about once a week. Finally, she stated she is 
not a religious person, and she does not support the current Iranian government.11 
 
                                                          
 
6 Exhibit E.  
 
7 Exhibit E.  
 
8 Tr. 68.  
 
9 Tr. 68-69.  
 
10 Tr. 69.  
 
11 Tr. 59-61. 
 
4 
 
Applicant has never traveled to Iran, nor has he met his spouse’s immediate 
family members. His contact has been limited to saying hello while his wife is speaking 
with her father or mother via Skype. Applicant expressed a good understanding of the 
security concern based on his spouse’s family ties to Iran.12 He understands his 
obligation to protect classified information, including his duty to report any attempt to 
obtain classified information based on his spouse’s family ties to Iran.13 He also stated 
that he and his spouse have discussed traveling to Iran, and the intention is that she will 
not travel to Iran to visit her family.14 
 
Concerning the country of Iran, the February 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran, then a 
key U.S. ally, opened a long rift in diplomatic relations between Iran and the United 
States. On November 4, 1979, radical Iranian students seized the U.S. Embassy in 
Tehran, and then held hostages until shortly after President Reagan’s inauguration on 
January 20, 1981. The United States severed relations with Iran on April 7, 1980. As a 
result, in the United States, the Iranian Interest Section is located in the Embassy of 
Pakistan, and the U.S. protecting power in Iran is Switzerland. The U.S. Government 
has a number of special concerns regarding Iranian behavior as outlined in Department 
Counsel’s written request 15 The concerns include Iran’s efforts to acquire weapons of 
mass destruction; its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; its 
ongoing support of the Assad regime in war-torn Syria; and its dismal human-rights 
record. In 2015 the U.S. Department of State reaffirmed its 1984 designation of Iran as 
a state sponsor of terrorism.     
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.16 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.17 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
                                                          
12 Tr. 93-95.  
 
13 Tr. 97-100.  
 
14 Tr. 97-98.  
 
15 Exhibit 3.  
 
16 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
17 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
 
5 
 
side of denials.”18 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.19 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.20 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.21 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.22 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.23 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.24 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.25 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.26 
 
Discussion 
 
 The central issue here is whether Applicant’s ties to Iran, the country of his wife’s 
birth, disqualify him from eligibility for access to U.S. classified information. Under 
Guideline B for foreign influence, the suitability of an applicant may be put into doubt 
due to an applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. The overall concern under the 
guideline is: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
                                                          
18 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
20 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
22 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
23 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
24 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
25 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
26 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
 
6 
 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.27 
 
 The starting point for the analysis is the country of Iran. Suffice it to say, the U.S. 
Government views the behavior of the Iranian government as presenting a serious 
national security concern. Given the evidence of Applicant’s ties to Iran, a country that is 
plainly hostile to the United States, the Government has established its case under 
Guideline B. In reaching this conclusion, I considered the following disqualifying 
conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; and  
 
AG ¶ 7(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 The guideline also provides that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate 
foreign influence concerns. Given the evidence here, I considered the following 
mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
                                                          
27 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
7 
 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country.  
 
 Applicant has multiple indicators of a mature, stable, responsible, and trustworthy 
person. He was articulate, serious, candid, and credible at the hearing. He reported his 
contacts with his then Iranian girlfriend in 2015, when he completed his security 
clearance application. He provided additional information about her during his 
background investigation. Because the adjudicative process is predicated upon 
individuals providing relevant information about their background, he receives 
substantial credit in mitigation for providing the information about his then girlfriend and 
now spouse. Overall, I conclude that he voluntarily reported the information about his 
spouse on his security clearance application, and he was truthful and complete in 
responding to questions during his background investigation and during his hearing. His 
willingness to provide such information suggests that he will report any adverse security 
information even when doing so is not necessarily in his own self-interest, which is 
exactly what the Defense Department expects of a cleared individual.  
 
 In addition, Applicant has a good understanding of the security issues based on 
his spouse’s family ties to Iran. His spouse has not traveled to Iran since her entry into 
the United States in 2013. Together, they have expressed an intention not to travel 
there in the future. It is clear that Applicant’s spouse, with a MBA from a U.S. university, 
intends to pursue a career here, as she is currently working to establish a start-up 
company in the U.S. health-care industry.  
 
 Nevertheless, Iran’s hostility to the United States and the heightened risk it 
presents places a heavy burden on Applicant to show that his ties via his marriage to 
Iran are mitigated. On this point, Applicant, purely in his personal capacity, has 
essentially no contacts or interests in Iran. His contacts with his spouse’s family 
members are limited to a simple greeting during a call. His spouse has the type of 
contacts that are normal and typical with adult family members who live great distances 
apart. The frequency of her calls with her father are greater than with her mother, as 
she described her father as “more mom-like” than her mother.28 Neither Applicant nor 
his spouse provide financial support to family members in Iran; both her parents are 
retired; and her siblings appear to be financially self-sufficient. In addition, the sister 
living in Iran is not employed by, connected to, or affiliated with the Iranian government 
or military, and her brother is a university student living in Italy. None of her immediate 
family members are in a sensitive, high-level, or high-profile position where they could 
easily come to the attention of Iranian authorities. Given these circumstances, his ties to 
Iran, while not benign, are not overly strong when compared with his ties to the United 
States. 
                                                          
28 Tr. 76-77.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States since he was a young child when he and 
his family arrived here from Cuba. He has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for about 30 
years. He attended U.S. schools and served honorably in the U.S. armed forces. His 
financial and employment interests are in the United States. His ties to Iran are a mere 
fortuity, based on a chance meeting of a woman who happens to be an Iranian citizen. 
Further, she is now a lawful U.S. resident based on her marriage to a U.S. citizen, she 
intends to pursue both her business and personal interests here, and she intends to 
become a U.S. citizen as soon as allowed by law. Considering the evidence as a whole, 
this is not a case of “divided allegiance”29 with an applicant who has one foot in the 
United States and one foot in a foreign country. On the contrary, the evidence shows 
Applicant has both feet firmed planted in the United States. These facts and 
circumstances are unlikely to change in the future, they weigh in his favor, and they lead 
me to conclude that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential foreign influence 
or pressure in favor of the U.S. interest. Looking forward, I am persuaded that Applicant 
can be expected to properly handle and safeguard classified information as well as 
promptly report any potential incidents of foreign influence or pressure. 
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a 
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or 
vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he 
met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
29 AG ¶ 6.  
 
