 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-06734 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns. However, his dishonesty during the security clearance process and 
other dishonest conduct raises significant security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the personal conduct and financial considerations guidelines. On May 31, 2016, 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer). He initially requested a decision based solely on 
the written record, but later requested a hearing.  
 
 On May 9, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the 
administrative record without objection.1 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on May 
16, 2017, and the record closed on May 23, 2017. 
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 – 4; Applicant’s Exhibits A – H. Applicant’s request for a hearing, other prehearing 
correspondence, the notice of hearing, case management order, and Applicant’s email indicating he would 
not be submitting post-hearing matters are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I – V, respectively. 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 48, served in the U.S. military from 1988 to 2008. He deployed over ten 
times during his military career. He has been employed as a federal contractor since 
retiring from the military. He has held a security clearance since he was in the military. 
He was hired as a security specialist by his current employer in 2015, and earns an annual 
salary of about $100,000. He holds a bachelor’s degree in business from an online school, 
and is currently pursuing a multi-disciplinary (criminal justice and cyber security) degree. 
His manager and a company vice president submitted letters, providing their favorable 
opinions regarding Applicant’s trustworthiness and overall character.2 
 
From approximately November 2008 to April 2013, Applicant worked for a large 
defense contractor, Company A. He was issued a corporate credit card that he could use 
for business-related travel and expenses. He was provided written guidance regarding 
the proper use of the corporate credit card.3  
 
In about 2012, Applicant misused his corporate credit card by charging personal 
expenses to the card. He did not pay the credit card bills and the account became 90-
days delinquent. Applicant was then questioned by his former supervisor, the security 
manager for Company A, about the unauthorized purchases. Applicant lied and blamed 
his ex-wife, claiming she took his corporate credit card without his knowledge and made 
the unauthorized purchases. Applicant’s former supervisor warned him, both orally and 
in writing, that he would be fired if a similar incident occurred.4 
 
On November 4, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. One 
of the questions on the application asked whether he had received a written warning or 
had otherwise been officially reprimanded for misconduct in the workplace. Applicant did 
not report the warning he received for misuse of the corporate credit card. In his Answer, 
Applicant admitted under oath that he deliberately falsified his security clearance 
application by not disclosing the warning. He goes on to state “Explanation: None to be 
given I was wrong.” 
 
In May 2014, Applicant was interviewed by a security clearance investigator. The 
investigator asked Applicant the same question that he was originally asked on the 
application about whether he had ever received a written warning or had otherwise been 
disciplined for employee misconduct. Applicant lied, denying he received a written 
warning. When the investigator asked Applicant directly if he had misused his corporate 
credit card while employed at Company A, Applicant again lied. He told the investigator 
that he only made authorized purchases and charges.5  
                                                          
2 Tr. 23-28; Exhibit 1; Exhibits A, B, E. 
 
3 Tr. 53-54; Exhibit 1. 
 
4 Tr. 48-70; Exhibits 1 – 2; Answer (Applicant admitted, under oath and in writing, that he received a written 
warning from his former supervisor for misusing his corporate credit card).  
 
5 Exhibit 2 at 6; Tr. 60-61, 69-70.  
 
3 
 
Applicant, “after a few moments of silence,” then told the investigator a similar lie 
that he had told his former supervisor. Namely, Applicant claimed that his “ex-girlfriend” 
had taken his card without his knowledge and made the unauthorized purchases. The 
investigator pressed Applicant about his story and confronted him with the information 
she had gathered during her investigation, Applicant continued to provide half-truths and 
misrepresent the facts, until finally admitting his role in the corporate credit card misuse.6  
 
Applicant then went on to claim in the interview that he misused the corporate 
credit card to purchase everyday necessities because he was experiencing a period of 
financial turmoil after his ex-wife lost her job. His security clearance application, however, 
reflects that he took two separate vacations to the Caribbean during the same time frame 
that he was misusing the corporate credit card.7  
 
Applicant also told the security clearance investigator that he did not admit his role 
in the credit card misuse to his former supervisor because she purportedly did not give 
him the opportunity to explain the situation. He told the investigator that, even though he 
knew he was under oath during the security clearance interview, he decided to lie to her 
at first about misusing the corporate credit card because he was “ashamed and felt he 
could get away with it.”8  
 
At hearing, Applicant admitted the multiple lies and misrepresentations he made 
to the security clearance investigator during the May 2014 interview. He, however, 
backtracked on his admission in his Answer to falsifying the security clearance 
application. He now claims to have not receive either written or oral warning for misusing 
the corporate credit card.9  
 
On November 26, 2013, a few days after submitting his security clearance 
application, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). His blood alcohol 
was measured at a .14, or nearly twice the legal limit. He pled guilty, but the court withheld 
imposition of judgment on condition Applicant complete probation and pay all assessed 
fines and costs. Applicant was on probation for about 18 months. He completed all terms 
of his probation, including alcohol counseling, and complied with all other terms imposed 
by the court.10 No evidence of any other alcohol-related issues was presented.  
 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 2 at 6-7; Tr. 60-70.  
 
7 Compare Exhibit 2 at 6-7, with, Exhibit 1 at 24-28 and Tr. 49-50. 
 
8 Exhibit 2 at 7. Applicant was sent the summary of his security clearance interview (Exhibit 2). He provided 
updated information regarding his drunk driving conviction and finances, and confirmed the accuracy of the 
relevant portions of the interview noted herein detailing the extensive lies he provided the investigator. 
 
9 Tr. 36-38, 50-53, 58-61, 69-70. Applicant also claimed that he misused the credit card because of financial 
problems related to the high cost of moving his family to a location closer to where he was working. He did 
not mention or attribute his past financial problems to his ex-wife losing her job, as he had claimed during 
the May 2014 security clearance interview.  
 
10 Tr. 33-36, 43-47; Exhibit 2 at 3-4; Exhibit 3; Exhibits F.  
 
4 
 
During his May 2014 security clearance interview, Applicant stated that he “has 
not told anyone about his [DUI] arrest to include his security officer.”11 At hearing, 
Applicant claimed that the reason he did not report the DUI arrest to his facility security 
officer (FSO) was because his criminal defense attorney advised him not to as the criminal 
charge was still pending in court. He also stated that he was working for Company B at 
the time and he did not have an FSO to report the DUI to. He claimed that he informed 
his former supervisor at Company B about the DUI.12 Applicant did not submit 
documentation to corroborate his testimony. It is unclear from the record, why Applicant 
would state in his sworn written Answer that “I should have told my previous FSO” about 
the DUI if, as he testified, he did not have an FSO to report the adverse information.13 
 
During his May 2014 security clearance interview, Applicant was confronted by the 
investigator with a number of delinquent debts appearing on his credit report. He 
submitted documentation showing that the two delinquent debts listed on the SOR, 
totaling less than $4,000, have been satisfied.14 No evidence was presented that 
Applicant has incurred other delinquent debt.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).15  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
                                                          
11 Exhibit 2 at 5. 
 
12 Tr. 34-35, 43-44. Applicant worked for Company B from November 2013 until June or July 2014. It is 
unclear from the record whether he supposedly informed his former supervisor about the DUI before or 
after his May 2014 security clearance interview. Answer, response to 1.f. 
 
13 Answer, response to 1.f. Applicant’s testimony seems highly suspect as he did not disclose this 
information during two separate clearance interviews or in his Answer. Instead, he waited until his hearing. 
 
14 Exhibits C, D, G, H.  
 
15 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). I considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines that 
were in effect at the time the SOR was issued, and my decision would have been the same. 
 
5 
 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14.16 Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses 
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
  
                                                          
16 See also ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017) (favorable decision reversed because 
Department Counsel failed to present evidence to substantiate allegation that was denied by applicant); 
ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (rejecting Department Counsel’s argument that an 
adverse decision can be based solely on non-alleged conduct). 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security clearance process relies on the honesty and candor of all applicants, 
and starts with the answers provided in the security clearance application. Dishonesty 
during the security clearance process raises a serious security concern that is explained 
at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid 
answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes. 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable national security 
eligibility determination . . .  refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful 
answers to lawful questions of investigators . . . in connection with a 
personnel security or trustworthiness determination.17 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations . . . determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, . . . involved in making a 
recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility determination, or 
other official government representative; 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas . . . which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
                                                          
17 See also SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(i) (“the adjudicative process is predicated upon individuals providing 
relevant information pertaining to their background and character for use in investigating and adjudicating 
their national security eligibility. Any incident of intentional material falsification . . . raises questions about 
an individual's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness and may be predictive of their willingness or ability 
to protect the national security.”)  
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the  
. . . falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(b): the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate 
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(f): the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability. 
 
 Applicant deliberately misused his corporate credit card in violation of his 
employer’s policy. When asked about it, he denied his role and concocted a story blaming 
his ex-wife. He continued to lie about his misuse of the corporate credit card and the 
discipline he received from his former employer during the security clearance process. In 
his Answer, Applicant appeared to finally accept responsibility for his past misconduct 
and the lies he told about it during the security clearance process. But, at hearing, 
Applicant started to back track on his admissions. He began minimizing and making 
claims that were not credible and were contradicted by his own prior sworn statements.  
 
 Beyond the misuse of the corporate credit card and dishonesty during the security 
clearance process, the evidence also shows that Applicant cannot be trusted to self-report 
adverse information. Notably, he failed to report the DUI when it occurred.18 His belated 
excuse for not self-reporting the adverse information to his FSO was  not supported by 
the evidence and is unworthy of belief. AG ¶ 16(a) – 16(c) apply. None of the mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant’s dishonesty during the security clearance process and other 
dishonest conduct remain a security concern.19  
                                                          
18 In ISCR Case No. 12-04813 (App. Bd. July 31, 2015), the Board, in addressing a case where an applicant 
failed to report his criminal arrest to his FSO, explained the serious security raised by such failure to self-
report adverse information:  “Willingness to advise an employer of one’s own security significant conduct 
or circumstances is a signal responsibility of those with access to classified information. Failure to comply 
with his duty raises concerns about the person’s fitness for a clearance.” Id. at 4.  
 
19 The SOR also alleges Applicant’s DUI as a security concern under Guideline E. This one-time incident 
occurred nearly four years ago and the record is devoid of any evidence of other alcohol-related problems. 
 
8 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
A person in financial distress is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. See generally AG ¶ 18 (explaining 
security concern). Here, Applicant lived beyond his means for some time and engaged in 
(arguably) criminal conduct to generate funds. Of note, he took multiple vacation trips to 
the Caribbean while, at the same time, using his corporate credit to make unauthorized 
purchases. He incurred some delinquent debt, which was not satisfied until relatively 
recently. However, at present, Applicant’s financial situation appears to be stable and the 
security concern raised by his dishonest financial conduct are sufficiently covered under 
Guideline E. Therefore, the Guideline F concern is resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant served honorably in the military, including multiple overseas 
deployments. He has held a security clearance for a long time. Since retiring from the 
military, Applicant has worked for the federal government as a contractor and his current 
employer seems pleased with his work. However, this and other favorable record 
evidence is insufficient to mitigate the heightened security concerns raised by Applicant’s 
dishonesty during the security clearance process. His conduct raises unmitigated 
concerns about his honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with significant doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance.20 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    For Applicant 
                                                          
The true security concern raised by the DUI is Applicant’s failure to report it to his FSO when it occurred. 
The security concern raised by this failure to self-report is sufficiently covered by a separate SOR allegation. 
Accordingly, SOR 1.a, alleging the DUI, is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
20 I considered the exceptions in SEAD-4, Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case. See SEAD-4, 
¶ E.3 and Appendix A, ¶ 2(h); contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) (under 
previous version of the guidelines, judges had “no authority to grant an interim, conditional or probationary 
clearance.”)  
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
