KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: When he completed his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant did not
disclose that he had charged-off debts. During his subsequent interview, the investigator asked
Applicant about his financial situation, and Applicant answered each question negatively. When
reminded that he was under oath and when confronted with his credit record, Applicant admitted
his delinquent debts. He stated that he had intentionally falsified his SCA and lied about his
financial difficulties because he was embarrassed. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-08255.a1
DATE: 08/22/2017
DATE: August 22, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-08255
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Daniel J. MacKinnon, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On  July
8, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 18, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant had some delinquent debts.  These included a charged-off balance owed to a credit
union.  Applicant offered to settle the debt, but the creditor demanded full payment.  Applicant did
not set aside funds to resolve this debt.  Applicant also had a charged-off debt to a bank in the
amount of $485, which he has paid.  
In December 2009, Applicant was affiliated with a fraternal lodge.  He asked the treasurer
if he could borrow $2,400 to cover a paint job at his personal residence.  Applicant was seeking a
home equity loan (HELOC) on his house, but the painter wanted his money immediately.  The
treasurer agreed, notifying the lodge of the loan.  Applicant was master of the lodge, a position that
entailed a fiduciary duty to the other members.  The next day, Applicant was contacted by a lodge
official.  Applicant promised that he would repay the loan within a week.  During December 2009,
Applicant’s HELOC was approved in the amount of nearly $82,000.  
On  December 7, Applicant met with lodge officials, who advised that he did not follow
proper procedures in seeking a loan.  For example, he presented his request to the treasurer rather
than to the lodge members themselves.  These officials reminded Applicant that he had previously
received a $1,500 loan from the lodge in 2007, which was not done according to lodge rules.  The
lodge had no proof that Applicant had paid the $1,500, and Applicant could not substantiate
payment.  Neither did he substantiate payment of the 2009 loan.  He resigned from the lodge on
December 7, 2009.
When he completed his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant did not disclose that
he had charged-off debts.  During his subsequent interview, the investigator asked Applicant about
his financial situation, and Applicant answered each question negatively.  When reminded that he
was under oath and when confronted with his credit record, Applicant admitted his delinquent debts. 
He stated that he had intentionally falsified his SCA and lied about his financial difficulties because
he was embarrassed.  
Applicant’s financial problems arose from funeral expenses resulting from his mother’s
death. In addition, Applicant’s sister did not pay property taxes on a house they inherited.  His
difficulties were also associated with the expenses of his wedding.  Applicant has had counseling
from a licensed certified social worker to help resolve emotional repercussions from deaths in the
family and from his financial problems.  Applicant has an annual income of about $47,000, and his
wife’s is about $34,000.  They have about $1,000 left over at the end of each month.  Applicant
enjoys a good reputation for the quality of his work performance and for his trustworthiness.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s charged-off debts and his two misappropriations of
lodge funds raised concerns under Guideline F.  Though noting certain things that were outside his
control that affected his debts, the Judge concluded that Applicant had not shown responsible action. 
She stated that, given Applicant’s history of late payments on various obligations and a lack of proof
that he had repaid his lodge, he had failed to mitigate the concerns arising from his debts.
The Judge also concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the concerns arising from his
false statements on his SCA and during his interview.  She stated that these falsifications were not
minor and that they impugn his judgment and trustworthiness.  She stated that he had not
demonstrated sufficient reform, in that he attempted to minimize the significance of his false
statement by contending that they resulted in some way from stressors that he had been
experiencing.  She also stated that, in obtaining money from his lodge outside the proper channels,
Applicant had put his own needs over those to whom he owed a fiduciary obligation.
Discussion
Applicant contends that he has demonstrated mitigation of the Guideline E concerns.  He
cites to his many years of holding a clearance without incident or concern, the counseling that he
has received, his efforts to resolve his debts, etc.  He argues that he has taken steps to eliminate any
vulnerability to coercion that his false statements may have entailed.  However, the Directive
provides that failure to provide truthful answers during national security investigations is of special
concern.  It also states that refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions
will normally result in an unfavorable determination.  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 15.  Given
Applicant’s admission that he deliberately withheld his financial delinquencies due to
embarrassment, we find no reason to conclude that the Judge’s unfavorable findings were arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant raises an issue of due process.  Specifically, he argues that the Judge erred in
concluding that the earlier misappropriation from the lodge, which occurred in 2007, raised security
concerns.  He notes that the SOR only alleged the incident in 2009 and that neither the Judge nor
Department Counsel sought to amend it.  He argues that by treating the 2007 incident as she did, the
Judge went beyond the scope of the SOR and that Applicant’s testimony regarding that incident
should not have been considered.
An SOR is an administrative pleading that does not have to allege every relevant fact.  To
the contrary, an SOR is sufficient if it places an applicant on notice of the concerns to be addressed
at the hearing so that he or she can prepare a case for mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06440
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  Variances between SOR allegations and a Judge’s findings may
occur from time to time.  They are material only when the extent of the variance is so great that the
SOR fails to serve as reasonable notice, subjecting the Applicant to unfair surprise.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).
In this case, the Judge’s findings about two misappropriations from Applicant’s lodge
constitute a variance from her formal finding on the SOR allegation, which refers only to one. 
However, we conclude that this variance was not material for the following reasons.  First, in 2009,
the lodge members discussed the 2007 incident with Applicant in the meeting that led to his
resignation.  The earlier incident, therefore, was part of the operative facts or res gestae underlying
the 2009 incident alleged in the SOR and is therefore within the general scope of that allegation. 
Second, the 2007 incident cannot plausibly have caused Applicant unfair surprise, insofar as he
addressed it in detail during his clearance interview and during the hearing.  Third, Applicant did
not state or otherwise indicate to the Judge that consideration of this earlier incident was unfair to
him.  Moreover, although the Judge stated that she would give Applicant time after the hearing to
submit additional evidence, he never requested for her to do so.  Tr. at 25.  Although pro se
applicants are not held to the standards of lawyers, they are expected to take reasonable and timely
steps to protect their rights.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2014). 
Because the variance between pleading and proof on this issue is not material, we conclude that the
Judge did not err in citing both incidents in her analysis of the disqualifying conditions.  However,
even if she did err, it was harmless, given that her adverse decision is independently supportable
based upon the Guideline E allegations discussed above.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00535 at 3
(App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017) for definition of harmless error.  
Applicant argues that he has shown mitigation of the Guideline F concerns.  However, this
argument is essentially a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not
enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08842 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 2017).  Applicant takes
issue with the Judge’s characterization of his loans as misappropriations.  Given the totality of the
evidence, the Judge’s use of that term is supportable.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
