 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07633 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial considerations 
and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On September 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated May 23, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 4, 2016. On April 19, 2016, he responded to 
the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on July 19, 2016. The case was 
assigned to me on September 19, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on February 22, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 13, 2017. 
 
During the hearing, two Government exhibits (GE) 1 and GE 2, one Administrative 
exhibit, and one Applicant exhibit (AE) A were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 21, 2017. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He failed to take advantage of that opportunity. 
The record closed on April 17, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, many of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., 1.e. through 1.h., 
1.j., 1.k., and 1.o. through 1.x.) and personal conduct (¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been an alarm 
monitor with his employer since May 2015. He owned a lawn care company and 
previously had several relatively diverse short-term full-time and part-time positions with 
various employers. He is a 2008 high school graduate with four semesters of college 
credits, but no degree. He has never served with the U.S. military. He currently holds an 
interim secret security clearance. Applicant has never been married. He has no children.  
  
Financial Considerations3 
The SOR identified 26 purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection or charged off, as generally reflected by his June 2015 credit report. Those 
debts total approximately $25,554. Their current status, according to the credit report, 
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 2 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 11, 2015; Applicant’s Answer 
to the SOR, dated April 19, 2016. 
 
3 
                                      
 
other evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments 
regarding same, are described below.  
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., 1.f., 1.g., 1.j., and 1.k.): It is unclear when Applicant’s finances 
became a problem for him. He was enrolled in college when his family “fell on hard times,” 
not otherwise described, and, when he lost a job, he could no longer afford to go to school, 
so he withdrew from college in the spring of 2010 to help his mother. Applicant and his 
mother eventually had a “falling-out,” and they haven’t spoken for a number of years. 
Withdrawing from college ended the deferment status of his student loans, and the 
payment status commenced. The evidence developed regarding Applicant’s student 
loans is confusing, as Applicant has offered inconsistent scenarios regarding his actions. 
He contended that there were only two student loans, but that somehow over time, they 
were sold or transferred to other entities, and they eventually increased to six student 
loans. The alleged unpaid balances and the dates opened for those loans are listed as 
follows: $4,097 opened in September 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); $2,710 opened in September 
2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); $1,337 opened in July 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.f.); $1,335 opened in April 2010 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.); $865 opened in July 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.j.); and $832 opened in April 2010 
(SOR ¶ 1.k.).  
 
In 2012, Applicant learned that his student loans were delinquent when his federal 
income tax refund was attached by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The funds were 
applied to his student loans. Applicant’s actions during the period between 2012 and 2015 
are unclear. He initially stated that upon learning of the IRS action, he started making 
payments to bring the student loans into good standing, and he claimed to have receipts 
to reflect his actions.4 He also stated that between 2012 and his interview with an 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), he did not take any 
action to research the status of his student loans. Applicant claimed that, at the time, he 
had “a lot going on, and [he] was trying to find a job” because he could not support himself 
with the jobs he had.5 Then he contended that in 2015, he contacted the student loan 
servicing company and started making payments.6 He claimed that he made monthly 
payments of $600 to bring the accounts current, and that he had receipts and interest 
statements to reflect his payments.7 Applicant contended that he has reduced the 
remaining balance from $13,000 or $15,000 down to $11,000.8 He acknowledged that he 
did not fully appreciate or understand his responsibilities with respect to the student loans 
until the issue appeared on his security clearance paperwork. Applicant attributed his 
actions or inaction to being young and not thinking it through.9  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 31-32. 
 
5 Tr. at 33. 
 
6 Tr. at 34-35 
 
7 Tr. at 36-37; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated April 19, 2016. 
 
8 Tr. at 35-36. 
 
9 Tr. at 27-28, 30. 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant failed to submit documentation to support his contentions that he had 
made any contacts with the student loan servicing agents or collection agents, or that he 
had made any payments directly to any entity with respect to his student loans, including 
the IRS, servicing agents, or collection agents. He indicated that he had receipts and 
monthly statements, but he failed to submit them, despite being given an opportunity to 
supplement the record. He was advised to contact his college student loan adviser, the 
U.S. Department of Education (DOE), and servicing agents, and to obtain documentation 
associated with his student loans, but there is no indication that he ever did so. Applicant 
submitted evidence that a credit repair company, on his behalf, filed numerous disputes 
with credit reporting agencies in June 2016, seeking the removal of a large number of 
negative accounts listed in his credit reports.10 There is no indication of the basis for the 
dispute. One of those accounts removed was one from the DOE, but the report does not 
indicate an account number, an alleged unpaid balance, or any other information to 
determine if that account is one alleged in the SOR. He failed to submit any 
documentation, such as receipts, cancelled checks, or account statements, to support his 
contentions that the student loans have been brought back from a default status and that 
he has been making monthly payments. In the absence of such documentation, there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that any of the student loan accounts are in the process 
of being resolved. 
In addition to Applicant’s student loan accounts, there are the following medical-
related accounts that were placed for collection with unpaid balances: $432 that Applicant 
contends he settled (SOR ¶ 1.n.); $247 that Applicant had scheduled for automatic 
payment for April 29, 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.r.); $203 that Applicant contended was paid by 
worker’s compensation in October 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.s.); $200 that Applicant contended was 
paid by worker’s compensation in October 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.t.); $149 that Applicant 
contended was paid by worker’s compensation in October 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.u.); $94 that 
Applicant contended he paid (SOR ¶ 1.w.); $65 that Applicant contended he paid (SOR 
¶ 1.x.); $32 that Applicant contended was paid by worker’s compensation in October 2015 
(SOR ¶ 1.y.); and $30 that Applicant contended was paid by worker’s compensation in 
October 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.z.).  
Applicant claimed that he had suffered an injury while on the job, resulting in 
surgery, and several of the medical accounts should have been covered by worker’s 
compensation. When he learned during his OPM interview that they had not been 
resolved, he said he contacted the collection agents. He contended that the accounts 
associated with his workplace injury were paid. Applicant was advised to contact the 
human resources office of his employer, the hospital where he was furnished medical 
treatment, and the worker’s compensation insurance carrier to obtain documentation 
regarding payments. Applicant failed to submit documentation to support his contentions 
that any of the medical-related accounts have been paid. Applicant’s credit repair 
company, on his behalf, filed numerous disputes with credit reporting agencies in June 
2016, seeking the removal of all of the medical-related negative accounts listed in his 
credit reports.11 There is no indication of the basis for the disputes. Of the 22 accounts 
                                                          
10 AE A (Credit Report Removals, dated June 20, 2016). 
 
11 AE A, supra note 10; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 7. 
 
5 
                                      
 
removed, several appear to be medical-related, but the report does not indicate account 
numbers, alleged unpaid balances, or any other information to determine if those 
accounts are the ones alleged in the SOR. In the absence of the requested 
documentation, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that any of medical-related 
accounts have been resolved or are in the process of being resolved. 
The remaining delinquent accounts were placed for collection or charged off with 
unpaid balances: a credit union joint installment agreement with Applicant’s mother for 
$3,379 that was charged off.  Applicant contended that he spoke with the loan officer and 
it was determined that the account was not his account and that it is in good standing 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.); a credit card with a $2,000 credit limit and a past-due balance of $2,215. 
Applicant denied the account was his, and he reported it as identity theft (attributed to his 
mother). His credit repair company disputed an account with the same creditor, but the 
report does not indicate an account number, an alleged unpaid balance, or any other 
information to determine if that account is the one alleged in the SOR. The disputed 
account was removed from Applicant’s credit report (SOR ¶ 1.d.); a truck loan with a high 
credit of $11,730 and an unpaid balance of $2,084 on a truck that was repossessed. 
Applicant contended he was working with an account representative to set up a 
repayment plan. Applicant’s credit repair company disputed an account with the same 
creditor, but the report does not indicate an account number, an alleged unpaid balance, 
or any other information to determine if that account is the one alleged in the SOR. The 
disputed account was removed from Applicant’s credit report (SOR ¶ 1.e.). 
There is an automobile loan cosigned for Applicant’s mother with a high credit of 
$4,500 and an unpaid balance of $1,138 that was charged off in 2012. Applicant 
contended he was working with an account representative to set up a repayment plan 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.); a bank-issued credit card with a $500 credit limit and a high credit of $1,136 
that was charged off and sold to a debt purchaser. Applicant contended the account was 
settled. Applicant’s credit repair company disputed an account with the same creditor, but 
the report does not indicate an account number, an alleged unpaid balance, or any other 
information to determine if that account is the one alleged in the SOR. The disputed 
account was removed from Applicant’s credit report (SOR ¶ 1.i.); an unspecified type of 
account with an unpaid balance of $955 that was sold to a debt purchaser. Applicant 
denied the account was his, and he reported it as identity theft (attributed to his mother) 
(SOR ¶ 1.l.); a telephone account with an unpaid balance of $779. Applicant denied the 
account was his, and he reported it as identity theft (attributed to his mother) (SOR ¶ 
1.m.). 
There is an electric power utilility account with an unpaid balance of $417 that 
Applicant contended had been settled. Applicant’s credit repair company disputed two 
accounts with the same creditor, but the report does not indicate account numbers, 
alleged unpaid balances, or any other information to determine if either of those accounts 
is the one alleged in the SOR. The disputed account was removed from Applicant’s credit 
report (SOR ¶ 1.p.); an insurance account with an unpaid balance of $252. Applicant 
denied that it was his account. He contended that it was his mother’s account, and that it 
had been written off due to his mother’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.q.);  and an 
 
6 
                                      
 
insurance account with an unpaid balance of $136 that Applicant had scheduled for 
automatic payment for April 29, 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.v.). 
Applicant was advised to contact his creditors, collection agents, credit reporting 
agencies, and police authorities to obtain documentation to support his contentions that 
he had paid certain accounts, settled certain accounts, that other accounts were 
determined to be not his, that identity theft was responsible for some accounts, that police 
reports had been filed regarding the alleged identity thefts, and correspondence related 
to disputes he and his credit repair company filed. He failed to submit any documentation, 
to support his various contentions related to the accounts alleged in the SOR. In the 
absence of such documentation, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that any of the 
accounts have been resolved or are in the process of being resolved.  
Applicant failed to submit a requested Personal Financial Statement to reflect his 
net monthly income normal monthly expenses and debt payments; and a monthly 
remainder available for discretionary spending or savings. There is no evidence of 
financial counseling. With approximately $25,554 in delinquent bills, none of which have 
conclusively been addressed by Applicant, despite his verbal and written assurances that 
his financial house is in order, it appears that Applicant’s finances are still not under 
control. After a multi-year period of ignoring his delinquent debts, essentially attributing 
his inaction to youthful inexperience and some poor choices, Applicant’s first order of 
business was not to contact his creditors, but to dispute his delinquent accounts to have 
them removed from his credit reports. In the absence of documentation pertaining to 
Applicant’s delinquent accounts, including his student loans, and Applicant’s current 
financial situation, it still remains unclear if Applicant’s financial situation has improved, or 
if his finances are under control.  
Personal Conduct 
 On May 23, 2015, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to certain 
questions pertaining to his financial record. The questions in Section 26 – Financial 
Record asked if, in the past seven years, he had: any possessions or property voluntarily 
or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed; bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency; any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay 
as agreed; or if any debts are or were 120 or more days delinquent. Another question 
was if he was currently delinquent on any Federal debt. Applicant answered “no” to those 
questions. He certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best 
of his knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions were, in fact, false. 
Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify his responses. He explained that times 
were hard, and he did not know anything about student loans showing up on credit report; 
he was aware that he had student loans and he knew they were delinquent; he was not 
aware of many of the accounts; that he voluntarily relinquished his vehicle for 
repossession; he was young; and he thought his debts were on their way to getting fixed. 
  
  
 
7 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”12 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”13   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”14 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.15  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
12 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
13 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
14 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”16  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”17 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision on any express 
or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an 
indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
                                                          
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. It is unclear when Applicant’s history of financial problems commenced, but it 
appears that it was around the time that he withdrew from college in the spring of 2010. 
His student loans and many other accounts became delinquent, and he had one vehicle 
repossessed. The SOR alleged that 26 debts became delinquent. Without documentation 
to support his claimed resolution efforts, the vast majority of his debts, including those as 
miniscule as $30 or $32 are still unresolved, despite Applicant’s claims that he has his 
financial house in order. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”18 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” 
 
I have concluded that none of the mitigating conditions apply. The nature, 
frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since about 2010 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it 
is “unlikely to recur.” He attributed losing a job, without describing which job, or how it 
negatively impacted him, withdrawing from school, his family falling on hard times, without 
otherwise describing the hard times, and identity theft supposedly perpetrated by his 
                                                          
18 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
mother, as the reasons for his financial issues. In the absence of more details, it is difficult 
to determine if any of those factors were largely beyond Applicant’s control. There is no 
evidence of financial counseling. Aside from Applicant’s verbal and written comments, 
there is no documentary evidence to support his claimed good-faith efforts to address his 
debts. Applicant was given guidance during the hearing as to the nature of recommended 
documentation, and he simply ignored that guidance. Applicant’s only proven action was 
to engage the support of a credit repair company to dispute nearly all of the accounts 
appearing in Applicant’s credit report. None of the disputes sets forth a reasonable basis 
to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debts, and there is no documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the disputes. That position indicates the absence of any priority 
to timely address his aging debts. There is also an inference that he is simply waiting for 
the debts to drop off his credit reports.  
  
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. 
In this instance, there are no references to a plan other than to remove the debts from 
Applicant’s credit reports, and there are lengthy periods of inactivity. 
 
There is little evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are yet under 
control. Under the circumstances, Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to 
address nearly all of his delinquent accounts and by failing to initiate meaningful efforts 
to work with his older creditors.19 He failed to submit documentation to support his 
purported efforts regarding all of his debts. Applicant’s actions, or relative inaction, under 
the circumstances casts substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.20 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 18: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
                                                          
19 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is a 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 As noted above, on May 23, 2015, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he 
responded to certain questions pertaining to his financial record. The questions in Section 
26 – Financial Record asked if, in the past seven years, he had: any possessions or 
property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed; bills or debts turned over 
to a collection agency; any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled 
for failing to pay as agreed; or if any debts are or were 120 or more days delinquent. 
Another question was if he was currently delinquent on any Federal debt. Applicant 
answered “no” to those questions. He certified that the responses were “true, complete, 
and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions 
were, in fact, false.  
 
Applicant’s comments provide sufficient evidence to examine if his submissions 
were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or merely an omission that was the 
result of oversight or misunderstanding of the true facts on his part. Proof of an omission, 
standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when 
the falsification or omission occurred. As an administrative judge, I must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is a direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning Applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the alleged falsification 
or omission occurred. I have considered the entire record, including Applicant’s initial and 
 
12 
                                      
 
subsequent comments.21 Applicant’s explanations for his submissions, in my view, were 
that he essentially danced around the questions during his hearing. On the one hand he 
would have me believe that he is mature enough to hold a security clearance, and on the 
other hand, he would have me believe that he is ignorant and naive regarding his 
finances. Those inconsistent explanations stretch credulity. AG ¶ 16(a) has been 
established. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
                                                          
21 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See 
also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of education and other 
experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to disclose past-due debts on a security 
clearance application was deliberate).  
 
 
13 
                                      
 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
I have concluded that none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
falsifications regarding his finances in his May 2015 e-QIP by intentionally failing to 
disclose the true extent of his financial difficulties is recent, serious, and not mitigated. A 
key component of the protection of classified information is reliance on security clearance 
holders to accurately report potential compromise of classified information. A person who 
has so many delinquent accounts, and who denies having them on their e-QIP cannot be 
relied upon to report potential compromise of classified information. Applicant’s actions, 
or relative inaction, under the circumstances casts substantial doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.22   
 
 There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no 
evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected 
information.  
                                                          
22 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. Applicant has an extensive history of financial problems that commenced in 
about 2010. Numerous accounts, including student loans, became delinquent. His debts 
were placed for collection or charged off. A vehicle was repossessed. When asked about 
his finances while completing his e-QIP, Applicant falsified and concealed the truth about 
his finances. Although he was offered the opportunity to submit documentation pertaining 
to his debts, as well as his purported efforts to resolve them, he failed to do so. In the 
absence of a Personal Financial Statement, the true state of his finances is not known. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:23 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding resolution of most of the long-standing debts in his 
name. His intentional falsifications regarding his finances are troubling. Overall, the 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal 
conduct. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG ¶ 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
                                                          
23 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.z.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
