 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-08838 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire 
                                            For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).1 In a response notarized on 
July 1, 2016, he admitted the sole allegation raised and requested a determination 
based on the written record. On July 26, 2016, the Government issued a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) with three attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to 
me on June 1, 2017. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find 
Applicant mitigated drug involvement security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG has been again 
amended, with little change to the guideline at issue, now referenced as Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
and Substance Abuse, and is now in effect for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old naval laborer (tester). He is a 1999 high school 
graduate. He served in the United States military from 1999 through 2002, then earned 
an associate’s degree in 2005.  
 
Applicant was unemployed from mid-2015 through at least August 2015, 
following non-governmental contract work between 2013 and 2015 as a freelance 
laborer. He had another period of unemployment in 2012, after a former place of 
employment closed the division in which he provided support. Earlier work experience 
included a position in a printing shop. He supported himself through periods of 
unemployment by living off savings and his former spouse’s income, and earned his 
college degree under the GI Bill. He has no outstanding financial obligations. Applicant 
is a divorced father of one young child. He now lives with his girlfriend, after a notable 
period of time living with family and family friends.  
 
Early in his high school education, in about July 1996, Applicant began using 
marijuana.2 As required, he later quit using marijuana while serving in the United States 
military (1999-2002). After his return to civilian life, he again began using marijuana 
while unemployed. He ultimately quit using the drug in May 2014, around the time he 
became a father and started to look for steady employment. Now 36 years old and in a 
settled relationship, he no longer associates with those individuals with whom he 
formerly used marijuana. 3 He no longer uses, nor desires to use, marijuana.  
 
Applicant does not hide his past drug abuse. In writing, he has expressed his 
intent not to use illegal drugs or abuse non-prescribed drugs in the future, and he has 
noted that he is committed to providing a “safe and prosperous environment for [himself] 
and [his] family.” (FORM Response) He noted: “in no way will my previous drug use 
have any impact on my integrity, nor will any attempts of coercion sway me to betray the 
trust given to me.” (FORM Response)  He understands the restriction and requirements 
regarding drug use applicable in this and in a military context, and acknowledges 
abstinence is necessary to maintain his employability in his present “professional 
endeavor.” (FORM Response) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
2 While not alleged, Applicant also tried Ecstasy on one isolated occasion in his early 20s. 
 
3 Applicant estimates he used marijuana about 200 to 500 times, cumulatively, between his mid-teens 
and when he quit marijuana use in early 2014. He characterizes that drug use as “recreational” and 
“occasional.” He never felt dependent on, or addicted to, the drug. He disclosed his drug use on his 2015 
security clearance application. (see FORM, Item 2 (at 35) and Item 3 (at 5-6), and FORM Response) 
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under the 
AG, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Under the Directive, an “applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24, where it is noted 
that the illegal use of a controlled substance, and the use of other substances that can 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. Such use also raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana, an illegal substance, for many 
years. This is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse. The Government’s 
substantial evidence, as provided by Applicant’s own admission, thus raises security 
 
 
 
 
4 
concerns under Guideline H. Therefore, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate related security concerns. To that end, 
Guideline H includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from drug involvement and substance misuse. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 26 potentially apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her past drug involvement and 
substance abuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to refrain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse 
is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.   
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies for multiple reasons. Despite early years when he was 
apparently adrift in the world without goals, Applicant became drug-free over three 
years ago. This was a mature step he apparently took around the time he first accepted 
responsibility as a father and he had become sufficiently settled to look for a secure 
employment situation. He has made the commitment to forego illegal drugs, and he 
stands by that commitment as a matter of personal integrity. Now a mature, responsible 
man in his 30s, all indicators indicate he will be able to maintain that commitment. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) also applies for multiple reasons. Applicant, himself, honestly 
disclosed his past marijuana abuse on his security clearance application. He continues 
to admit to his past drug use, and does so without equivocation or contrived excuse. His 
background reflects a man who arrived late to maturity and professionalism. Since 
settling on a profession, becoming a father, and starting a new relationship, however, he 
has focused on his future rather than the moment. He no longer associates with those 
who shared his abuse of drugs. Moreover, he has written a FORM Response that 
includes, in spirit, if not by verbatim, the pivotal points enumerated in AG ¶ 26(b)(3) – 
specifically, a signed statement of intent not to use drugs in the future that 
acknowledges that any future failure will have negative professional repercussions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
5 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s past drug use, I considered his 
education, past employment, military service, and family life in terms of the periods of 
his personal and professional development, as well as his credible FORM response.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old naval yard worker who graduated from high school in 
1999. During his underclassman years, he began using marijuana. He ceased using 
marijuana for his military service. He subsequently went back to the drug as an 
occasional, recreational user.  
 
Around the time he became a father and decided to look for more stable 
employment after periods of unemployment, Applicant quit using marijuana for good. 
That was in May 2014. The facts reflect that Applicant has evolved and matured over 
the past few years. Now drug-free, he is devoted to his child, his new girlfriend, and his 
work. He has written credibly of his intent to remain drug-free in the future. He does not 
associate with his old drug-abusing friends, and he stays away from that milieu. Given 
these unique facts, I find that drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns 
have been mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
