 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07645 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on October 10, 2016, and October 11, 
2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2017. After coordinating with the 
parties, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on May 16, 2017, scheduling the hearing for June 29, 2017. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, but she did not submit documentary evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 10, 2017.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since October 2012. She attended college for a period without 
earning a degree. She is single with three adult children.1 
 
Applicant has a history of financial and tax problems. She had business problems 
and filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy cases in 2001 and 2002. The cases were dismissed in 
2002 and 2003.2 
 
Applicant’s mother passed away without life insurance in 2010. Applicant spent 
about $10,000 on her mother’s funeral expenses. Her mother’s death also affected her 
emotionally, and she was out of work for several months while she grieved and 
recovered. She also helped two of her children financially while they attended college.3 
 
Applicant fell behind on her mortgage loan payments. She filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case in 2011 as a means of protecting her home from foreclosure and to 
obtain a mortgage loan modification. The case was dismissed in 2011 and refiled in 
2012. Applicant received the mortgage loan modification. The second case was 
dismissed in 2013.4 
 
Applicant filed her 2006 and 2008 federal income tax returns a year or more late. 
She admitted owing the IRS for multiple tax years, including 2006, 2008, 2009, and 
2010. She stated that she had payment plans with the IRS, her income tax refunds were 
withheld, and the taxes owed for the oldest years have been paid. As of the date of the 
hearing, she had not filed her 2015 and 2016 federal income tax returns. She estimated 
that she owed $7,000 to the IRS in 2016 when she established a $250 to $350 payment 
plan. She stopped the payment plan after a few months because she had medical 
expenses. She planned to file her 2015 and 2016 tax returns by October 2017.5 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s multiple Chapter 13 bankruptcy cases (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.e); that she did not file her 2006 and 2008 federal income tax returns as required 
(SOR ¶ 1.f); that she owed the IRS for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.g-
1.i); three medical debts totaling $137 (SOR ¶¶ 1.l-1.n); $5,115 owed for the deficiency 
on an auto loan after the car was repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.k); a $4,488 defaulted student 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-21, 45; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 Tr. at 19-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 6-8.  
 
3 Tr. at 16, 22-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2.  
 
4 Tr. at 16-17; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 9, 10.  
 
5 Tr. at 30-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. The SOR alleged that Applicant did not file federal 
income tax returns for tax years 2006 and 2008, and that she owed for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2013. 
Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be 
considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
3 
 
loan (SOR ¶ 1.q); two duplicate $579 debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.r); a $100 city parking 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.s); and two miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling $653 (SOR ¶¶ 1.j 
and 1.p).  
 
 Applicant is paying her student loan, and it is current. She denied knowledge of 
the three medical debts and the city parking debt. None of the debts are listed on the 
two most recent credit reports. She questioned the legitimacy of the $451 “payday” loan 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. She admitted to having loans with the company in the past, but 
she believed they were all paid. This debt is listed on all three credit reports. The 
remaining non-tax delinquent debts are established through Applicant’s admissions and 
credit reports.6 
 
Applicant stated that her finances are better. She received financial counseling 
as a requirement of her bankruptcy case. She stated that all her current responsibilities 
are paid on time. Her mortgage loan is current, and her car loan is almost paid off.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 37-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5.  
 
7 Tr. at 20, 46-47, 51.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 
5 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems including multiple bankruptcy 
petitions, late tax returns, unpaid taxes, a defaulted student loan, a repossessed 
vehicle, and other delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.r allege duplicate accounts. SOR ¶ 1.r is concluded for 
Applicant. 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h allege that Applicant owes a specific amount to the IRS for 
tax years 2009 and 2010. The Government established through Applicant’s admissions 
that she owed the IRS for tax years 2009 and 2010, but the amount owed was not 
established. The amounts owed in those allegations are found for Applicant. The 
remaining language that Applicant owed the IRS for those tax years remains. The 
Government did not establish that Applicant owes the IRS for tax year 2013 as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b. That allegation is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 The three medical debts that total less than $140 (SOR ¶¶ 1.l through 1.n) do not 
generate security concerns. SOR ¶¶ 1.l through 1.n are concluded for Applicant.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant stated the Chapter 13 bankruptcy cases in 2001 and 2002 resulted 
from business problems. Those cases have no current security significance and are 
mitigated. She attributed her recent financial problems to paying her mother’s funeral 
expenses and her unemployment while she grieved and recovered. She filed a Chapter 
13 bankruptcy case in 2011 as a means of protecting her home from foreclosure and to 
obtain a mortgage loan modification. She received the mortgage loan modification, and 
the case was dismissed. Applicant’s Chapter 13 cases do not have any independent 
security significance outside of her delinquent debts, which are already alleged. Her 
bankruptcy cases are mitigated. 
 
Applicant’s tax issues predate her mother’s death and are ongoing. She filed her 
2006 and 2008 federal income tax returns late, and she owes the IRS several thousand 
dollars. Her 2006 and 2008 late filings would be mitigated if she had learned from the 
experience, which she has not because her 2015 tax return has not been filed. Failure 
to comply with tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-
established government rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with rules and 
systems is essential for protecting classified information. See e.g. ISCR Case No. 14-
06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016). 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(g) are not 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) are 
only applicable to the student loan, which is being paid, and the disputed city parking 
debt. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l-1.n:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.p:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q-1.s:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
