 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08550 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations, and E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are 
effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2016 and August 2, 2016, and elected 
to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on 
September 2, 2016. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 8. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant responded to 
the FORM and provided documents that are marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through L. There were no objections by either side and all evidence was admitted. The 
case was assigned to me on July 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 1.l. She denied the 
remaining allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. She served in the military from 1989 to 1995 and 
received an honorable discharge. She married in 1990 and divorced in 2000. She has a 
child from the marriage, who is 26 years old. She remarried in 2000 and has a child 
from the marriage, who is 16 years old. Applicant has worked for her present employer 
since 2001 and is a senior manager.  
 
 In April 2010, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA).2 In 
November 2012, she was interviewed by a government investigator as part of a 
background investigation. She was confronted by the investigator with delinquent or 
past due debts from her credit report. The debts were from 2012: SOR ¶ 1.a (mortgage 
past due $28,065, alleged in SOR past due-$22,315); ¶ 1.b (credit card-collection-
$6,393); ¶ 1.d (credit card collection-$4,307); ¶ 1.e (in 2012, original debt past due-
$125, now with collection company-$3,525); ¶ 1.g (in 2012, original debt past due-$64, 
now with collection company-$683); ¶ 1.i (credit card collection-$10,456); ¶ 1.j (credit 
card collection-$9,133); and ¶ 1.k (in 2012, credit card, past due $135, now delinquent 
balance-$3,177).3 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that she was refinancing her mortgage loan and 
was told not to make payments on the loan until the transaction had been completed. It 
took three months to refinance the loan. She hoped to have the mortgage current as of 
April 2014. In her answer to the SOR, she said she was unaware the mortgage loan 
was reported as delinquent while the modification was in a trial period. In her FORM 
response, she provided documents to show the loan modification was completed in 
February 2015. She stated that the loan is no longer delinquent, and it is reflected as 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
current on her credit report. Applicant did not provide a copy of the credit report or 
supporting documents to show payments are current.4 
 
 During her 2012 interview, Applicant explained to the investigator that the debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.i, and 1.j were delinquent or past due because they were used to 
purchase household goods; the interests rates increased; and she was not able to make 
the high monthly payments. She was working with a financial institution to lower the 
interest rates and work out settlements. She told the investigator she wanted to resolve 
the debts by December 2013.5  
 
Regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k, Applicant stated that she put this card on hold 
while she was refinancing her mortgage loan and the account became three months 
past-due. She stated it was current as of November 2012. She told the investigator that 
the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g, she forgot to make payments for one or two months, 
but they were also current as of November 2012. The investigator also confronted her 
with a debt to another creditor that was past-due in the amount of $1,717. She told the 
investigator that she got behind on this account because other bills took priority. She 
made a settlement offer with the creditor and paid $700 to settle that account.6 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied ¶ 1.b stating, “I was not aware of a 
delinquent [credit] card. I have a [credit] account with a balance of $12,500 but it isn’t 
delinquent and I am an authorized user not individual account.”7 Her response to SOR ¶ 
1.d was “I deny this account, seems to be a duplicate of item b.”8 These are the same 
accounts she was confronted with by the investigator in 2012, which she acknowledged 
were past-due. Credit reports from November 2012 and January 2015 show that the 
accounts are solely in Applicant’s name, and she is not only an authorized user. They 
also show the accounts are not duplicates and are delinquent. In Applicant’s response 
to the FORM, she provided copies of an IRS form with a heading: “Changes to your 
2014 tax return.” It is dated October 17, 2016. She highlighted on the document 
“cancellation of debt” for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d. The accounts reflect her 
social security number, although the form is under a different social security number, 
likely her husband’s, if they filed jointly. The total amount canceled was $6,607.9 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j. For SOR ¶ 1.i, she 
stated, “I deny this account. I have [account] credit card with a balance of $10,936 with 
                                                          
4 Item 4; AE B, C, D.  
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
7 Item 1. 
 
8 Item 1. 
 
9 Items 1, 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
no missed payments.”10 For SOR ¶ 1.j she stated, “I deny this account, I was not aware 
of this delinquent account. Seems to be a duplicate of item i.”11 These are the same 
accounts she was confronted with by the investigator in 2012, which she acknowledged 
were past due. Credit reports from November 2012 and January 2015 show that the 
accounts are solely in Applicant’s name and she is not only an authorized user. They 
also show the accounts are not duplicates and are delinquent.12 
 
In her answer, Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c indicating it had been sold 
to the collection company in SOR ¶ 1.e. She stated she had a payment plan with the 
collection company and the balance owed was $3,525, the same amount as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. She said she was unaware the original creditor had reported the account in 
default.13 Applicant provided a document from September 2016 from a law firm 
representing the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c reflecting a balance owed of $6,898 and an offer 
to settle the account with different payment options. A handwritten star is next to one of 
the options. There is no document verifying that Applicant made any payments with the 
creditor. The options in the payment plan provide for a settlement amount of $4,829, 
paid in two payments due on September 2016 and October 2016, or a monthly plan of 
$63.88 for the balance of the debt.14 In her FORM response referring to SOR ¶ 1.c, 
Applicant stated: “This account was sold to a collection company and I have a payment 
plan with them, with a balance of $3,525. Wasn’t aware that [creditor] was reporting the 
default.”15 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e are different accounts. Applicant has not 
provided proof that she accepted the settlement offer and is making payments on the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. She also has not provided proof that she has a payment plan for the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.e and is making payments. 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. She wrote: 
“I wasn’t aware of this creditor at the time but I have called them and settled the 
account. This company bought the account from [the creditor in SOR 1.h.]”16 Applicant 
provided a copy of a June 2016 settlement offer from the creditor for the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.g. There is insufficient evidence to conclude it is the same account as the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.h. Applicant previously admitted to the investigator in 2012 that the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.g was past due and she intended to pay it by November 2012. In handwriting next to 
option 2 on the letter is the word “paid.” In her FORM response, she stated that she was 
                                                          
10 Item 1. 
 
11 Item 1. 
 
12 Items 1, 4. 
 
13 Item 1.  
 
14 AE E. 
 
15 AE B, 
 
16 Item 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
making monthly payments and estimated the debt would be settled in January 2017. 
She did not provide documentary proof to show she had initiated the payments.17  
 
Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶ 1.f (collection by law firm-$2,102) and ¶ 1.m 
(past due-$238), which are reflected on her January 2015 credit report. Applicant did 
not provide documentary evidence of her dispute or any action she has taken to resolve 
these debts. She stated in her answer to the SOR that the debts are not on a 2016 
credit report, but failed to provide that document to corroborate her statements or 
evidence they are paid.18 
 
Applicant admitted the garnishment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l for a judgment. She 
explained that she had cosigned a car loan for her sister. Her sister defaulted on the 
loan. Applicant became aware of the problem and contacted her sister to repay the 
loan. Applicant contacted the creditor and discussed payment. She also discussed with 
her sister paying the negotiated settlement amount. Applicant received a garnishment 
notice for a judgment. She again contacted her sister who had filed bankruptcy, so the 
creditor was seeking payment from Applicant. Applicant stated that in the state where 
she works, the law prevents garnishment except for taxes and child support. Applicant 
contacted the creditor in 2012 and reached a settlement with the creditor that she stated 
she paid, and the garnishment was dismissed.19 Applicant stated in her FORM 
response that she did not disclose this information on her 2015 SCA because:  
 
I was under the impression, the garnishment/judgment has been settled, 
dismissed and removed from my credit report, it seemed it never became 
an official garnishment since it was released from my payroll and the 
judgment removed. That is why I answered the question as I did in 
February 2015 and July 2016.20 
 
Applicant provided a copy of the settlement agreement with the creditor from 
2012. Although it does not show that the settlement amount was paid, the judgment is 
not reflected on Applicant’s 2012 or 2015 credit reports.21 Applicant did not disclose the 
judgment on her 2015 SCA as required.22 I found her explanation for not disclosing the 
information credible. 
 
                                                          
17 Items 1, 4, 6, ; AE B, I. 
 
18 Items 1, 7. 
 
19 Item 1. 
 
20 AE F. 
 
21 Items 4. 5. 6, 7; AE H. 
 
22 Item 3. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 26 of the 2015 SCA asked Applicant to provide information about her 
financial record regarding delinquencies involving routine accounts. Specifically it 
asked:  
 
Other than previously listed, have any of the following happened? In the 
past seven (7) years you… had bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency?; had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?; have been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt not previously entered?; are currently over 120 
days delinquent on any debt? 
 
 Applicant responded “no” to all of the questions. In Applicant’s August 2, 2016 
SOR answer to ¶ 2.a, she said: 
 
[S]ome of the accounts on my credit report are delinquent, but I wasn’t 
aware the creditors where (sic) reporting against me, since I was making 
payments. Several of the accounts described in section 1, I deny because 
I wasn’t aware of them on my credit report nor are they true accounts.23 
 
In her FORM response, she stated that “I was thinking of delinquencies at the moment 
and only those I was aware of and not what the question was actually asking ‘in the past 
seven years.’ I didn’t pull my credit report, and several accounts listed I wasn’t aware of 
their reporting.”24 
 
 As detailed above, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in 
2012 and confronted with many of the delinquent debts that are alleged in the 2016 
SOR. She acknowledged they were delinquent or past due and she was unable to pay 
them because she was refinancing her house; had purchased household goods; and 
the interest rates were high; or she forgot about them. Applicant’s explanations for not 
disclosing other debts are not credible. Payment plans she provided were dated after 
the SOR, and she failed to provide proof that she is making payments on the plans. The 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d were never paid, but were eventually cancelled by the 
creditor, and she received an IRS notice confirming that. I find that she deliberately 
failed to disclose delinquent and past due debts.  
 
 Applicant provided documents from October 2016 showing that she has 
contacted a financial counseling service and that it would be contacting her to begin a 
credit review and advised her to obtain a copy of her credit report. She stated that she 
was working on a budget and will continue to work on items listed in her credit report.25  
 
 
                                                          
23 Item 1. 
 
24 AE B. 
 
25 AE L. 
 
7 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous unresolved delinquent debts dating from at least 2012, 
which she has been unable or unwilling to resolve. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
9 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged many of the delinquent or past due debts alleged in the 
SOR during her 2012 background interview. Other debts became delinquent 
subsequent to her interview. Most of the delinquent debts are unresolved. She did not 
provide a reasonable explanation for her failure to pay her debts. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that her financial problems happened under unique circumstances 
or are unlikely to recur. Her conduct casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires that the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond Applicant’s control. Applicant did not provide 
sufficient evidence to apply this mitigating condition. If there were conditions beyond her 
control, she failed to provide sufficient evidence that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She has been aware of the financial security concerns since her 2012 
background interview. Many of the debts that were addressed during that interview were 
subsequently alleged in the 2016 SOR. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is evidence that Applicant has enrolled with credit counselors. There is 
minimal evidence that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control 
because she failed to provide documentary evidence that she has paid, or is paying 
most of her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies.  
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence that the wage garnishment from a 
judgment as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l was resolved in 2012. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to this debt. 
Applicant provided a copy of her mortgage loan modification agreement from 2015, but 
did not provide evidence that her payments are current. She provided some evidence 
that creditors offered to settle certain debts through payment plans, but she did not 
provide evidence that she made the payments and resolved or is resolving the debts. 
After disputing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, she provided IRS documents to show 
that these two debts were canceled and resulted in tax consequences for tax year 2014. 
 
10 
 
 
Cancellation of a debt does not constitute a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise 
resolve a debt. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply except as noted above. 
 
Applicant disputed many of the debts alleged in the SOR, stating she was 
unaware of them; they were duplicates; or that she had current credit cards with the 
creditors. Some of these debts she was confronted with in 2012, and she admitted she 
owed. Applicant did not provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of her 
disputes or reliable evidence of actions she has taken to resolve the issues. The 
exhibits she provided were incomplete. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
I find that Applicant was aware she had delinquent or past due debts when she 
completed her 2015 SCA, and she deliberately failed to disclose them. During her 2012 
background interview with a government investigator, she was confronted with many of 
the debts alleged in the SOR. She acknowledged they were delinquent or past due, and 
asserted that she was resolving them. I did not find her explanations for failing to 
disclose the derogatory information credible. The above disqualifying condition applies 
to SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Applicant provided an explanation for her failure to disclose a judgment entered 
against her. The information she provided regarding the garnishment and her 
subsequent resolution of the judgment was credible. I find she did not deliberately omit 
this information from her 2015 SCA. SOR ¶ 2(b) is found in her favor. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
11 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 17(a). There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct her 
omissions before being confronted by an investigator. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply 
because deliberately failing to disclose information on a SCA, and swearing to its 
accuracy is not a minor offense. During Applicant’s 2012 background interview, she was 
made aware that there were security concerns regarding her finances. When she 
completed her 2015 SCA, she failed to disclose any derogatory information about her 
finances. In her answer to the SOR, she denied some of the delinquent debts, even 
though she had admitted during the prior interview that she owed them and they were 
past-due or delinquent. I find Applicant’s omissions are serious and cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Applicant is 41 years old and served in the military four years. She has worked 
for her employer since 2001 and is a senior manager. Applicant has delinquent debts 
that remain unresolved. She deliberately failed to disclose her delinquencies on her 
2015 SCA. Many of these debts had been brought to her attention during a 2012 
background interview for a previous security clearance. The record evidence leaves me 
with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
