 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-04738 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 The security concerns about Applicant’s drug use and criminal conduct are 
mitigated by the passage of time and change in circumstances. Applicant’s request for 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 19, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
On July 11, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) containing 
allegations that raised security concerns addressed under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).2 At the time 
the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my 
recommended decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On September 27, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in 
support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on October 4, 2016, and had 30 
days from the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the 
FORM and to submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant did 
not provide any additional information in response to the FORM. I received the case on 
August 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant used marijuana “with varying 
frequency” between 2007 and 2008 (SOR 1.a); that he was arrested for possession of 
marijuana in December 2007 (SOR 1.b) and in March 2015 (SOR 1.c); and that 
prosecutors later dismissed both charges. Under Guideline J, the Government cross 
alleged all of the facts in SOR 1.a – 1.c as criminal conduct.6 Applicant admitted, with 
remarks, all three SOR allegations. (FORM, Item 1) In addition to the facts established 
by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked as an aircraft washer since September 2013. He and his wife have been 
married since December 2012. Applicant has one child from this marriage and two 
stepchildren, all under 18 years old. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant used marijuana about once a week between 2005 and 2008. In a 
subject interview with a government investigator on July 15, 2014, and in his notarized 
response to the SOR, he stated he has not used marijuana since January 2008. He 
also averred he understands that such conduct in the future would jeopardize his 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on three 
enclosed exhibits (Items 1 - 3). 
5 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
6 SOR 2.a contains a typographic error, in that, it refers to information contained “in paragraph 2, above.” 
This allegation in fact refers to information in paragraph 1. 
 
3 
 
employment and his family’s well-being. Applicant attended college between 2010 and 
2012, but now intends to return to school to better himself. (FORM, Items 1 – 3) 
 
 In December 2007, police charged Applicant with possession of marijuana. After 
completing a pre-trial diversion program, the state dismissed the charge. On the 
evening of March 18, 2015, police pulled over Applicant as he drove home after 
dropping a friend off at his house. Applicant knew he had unpaid traffic tickets and so 
advised the officer. This gave the officer probable cause to search Applicant’s vehicle, 
whereupon the officer found drug paraphernalia under the front passenger seat. 
Applicant denied that it was his or that he knew it was in his car. The state later 
dismissed the charge. (FORM, Items 1 and 3). 
 
 Applicant has been forthcoming about his drug use and drug-related arrests. He 
disclosed his use of marijuana in his e-QIP and discussed it in detail during his subject 
interview. In response to DOD adjudicators’ request for information about drug-related 
offenses since July 2014, Applicant answered “no,” indicating he had not been arrested 
since; however, he also provided records of his March 2015 arrest and dismissal. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest8 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce 
sufficient reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or 
                                                 
7 Directive. 6.3. 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must 
prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR.9 If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.10  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
for them to have access to protected information.11 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access 
to classified information in favor of the Government.12 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s debts reasonably raised the 
security concern expressed at AG ¶ 24: 
 
 The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions 
at AG ¶¶ 25(a) (any substance misuse (see above definition)); and 25(c) (illegal 
possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). Applicant used 
marijuana, a controlled substance, for three years before 2008. He was also charged 
with possession of marijuana in 2007 and 2015. 
 
By contrast, the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely 
                                                 
9 Directive, E3.1.14. 
10 Directive, E3.1.15. 
11 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
12 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment) applies. Applicant has not used marijuana for more than eight years. 
His explanation regarding drug paraphernalia found in his car in March 2015 is 
plausible, and it was sufficient for the state to dismiss the charge. Available information 
is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Available information shows Applicant illegally used a controlled substance 
between 2003 and 2008. He also was twice charged with possession of that controlled 
substance. This information is sufficient to reasonably raise the security concern about 
criminal conduct at AG 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 More specifically, this record requires application of the following AG 31 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s repeated use of marijuana during the period alleged 
constitutes a series of minor illegal offenses. Further, the information about his 
two arrests, along with his admissions or remarks, is sufficient as evidence of 
criminal possession of a controlled substance. 
 
 By contrast, the following AG 32 mitigating conditions apply:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana in over eight years, and the drug-related arrest 
to which he admits is older than that. As to the March 2015 drug-related arrest, his 
explanation about what happened was reasonable, and the matter was not prosecuted. 
Applicant last used marijuana at age 20. Since then, he has married and started a 
family. The passage of time since 2008 and Applicant’s change in circumstances are 
sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about his drug use.  
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant appears to have 
matured with age and with the advent of family life. He has worked for the same 
employer since 2013, and there has been no verifiable misconduct since 2008. A fair 
and commonsense assessment of all available information shows that the security 
concerns in this case should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
