 
 
 
 
1 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 15-07915 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file federal and state income tax returns for 2013 and 2014, and 
resolve two delinquent debts. Resulting financial security concerns were not mitigated. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the previous Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
 
 
 
 
2 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 
2006 (AG). This decision applies the new AG that became effective on June 8, 2017.1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on July 5, 2016, and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 1.) A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
three Items, was mailed to Applicant on August 18, 2016, and received by him on 
September 14, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and 
submitted a letter in response to the FORM, which I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
Items 1 through 3 and AE A are admitted into evidence without objection. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on May 22, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the four allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are 
incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and divorced. From 1998 to 2012, he served in the U.S. 
Air Force, the Air Force Active Reserve, and Air National Guard until he was honorably 
discharged. He has a bachelor’s degree. After leaving military service, Applicant started 
his own business in 2013. Prior to that he worked in private industry and owned a 
business at different times. (GE 2.) 
 
 On December 18, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). In response to questions related to his financial record, he disclosed that he failed to 
file federal and state income tax returns for “2014.”2 He wrote, “Will file returns for 2013 
and 2014 at the same time upon receipt of all W-4s.” (GE 2.) He estimated that his tax 
liability was $100,000. (GE 2.) 
 
 The June 2016 SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file federal and state income 
tax returns for 2013 and 2014. Applicant admitted that allegation. Based on a credit 
bureau report (CBR) from January 2015, the SOR also alleged two delinquent debts, 
which became delinquent in 2014 and totalled $4,795. (GE 3.) In his Answer, Applicant 
stated that his 2013 and 2014 taxes were paid in early 2016. He said that the two debts 
were paid in mid-2015. (Item 1.) He did not submit documentation to corroborate those 
assertions. 
 
 Applicant stated that his financial issues arose after he began a business in 2013. 
He did not have the necessary business knowledge to successfully operate the business 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. Although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG, my decision would be the same under either 
set of guidelines. 
2At this time Applicant’s 2014 tax returns were not due. He seemingly made an error and meant 2013, as 
indicated in his note following that disclosure. 
 
 
 
 
3 
or enough money to pay debts until he subsequently began working for a defense 
contractor.  
 
 Department Counsel notified Applicant in its August 2016 FORM that he had not 
provided evidence that he filed his 2013 or 2014 tax returns. In response to that FORM, 
Applicant stated that he was a patriot, who proudly served his country. He emphasized 
the financial hardships he encountered when he began his business. He said his credit 
report documented that he no longer owed the two alleged delinquent debts. He did not 
submit evidence verifying that he paid those two debts or that he filed the outstanding tax 
returns. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
 
 
 
 
4 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Finally, as 
emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision 
shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to 
the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) 
(listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.3 
 
AG ¶ 19 lists three disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file federal and state tax returns for 2013 
and 2014. He also has been unwilling or unable to resolve delinquent debts from 2014. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 
 
5 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets out four conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(c) the person has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
Applicant has not presented documentary evidence that he filed his 2013 and 2014 
federal and state income tax returns, or paid two delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply because these financial issues remain ongoing. Applicant established limited 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), as there is some evidence that his financial difficulties began 
when he experienced business problems associated with owning a business, some of 
which may not have been within his control. However, there is no evidence from which to 
conclude that he acted responsibly under the circumstances while those problems arose.   
 
The record evidence is insufficient to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) or AG 
¶ 20(d). There is no documentation indicating that he participated in financial counseling 
or that the alleged security concerns are under control. He did not provide evidence that 
he initiated or is adhering to a good-faith effort repay or resolve the delinquent debts. AG 
¶ 20(g) does not apply because there is no evidence that he made arrangement with 
either the federal or state taxing authority to file his outstanding returns or pay any 
amounts due.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). They include the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) 
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an educated 39-year-old 
man, who honorably served this country for 14 years. Those are positive factors in this 
case. However, he failed to document that he timely filed federal and state income tax 
returns for 2013 and 2014, and paid two delinquent debts from 2014. In its August 2016 
FORM, Department Counsel notified him that he had not submitted verification that he 
had resolved both of those financial issues, as he asserted in his Answer. Despite being 
placed on notice, he did not submit additional evidence with his response to the FORM. 
The absence of proof of the resolution of those four SOR allegations outweighs the 
positive factors. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
