                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 15-01241
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and file exhibits, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
History of Case
On September 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why the DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865),
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AGs) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 16, 2015, and elected to have
his case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 9, 2016, and did not respond to the FORM with
objections or supplemental information.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated eight delinquent debts,
exceeding $20,000. Allegedly, the listed delinquent debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted several of the listed debts with
explanations. He claimed the admitted debts will be paid. He denied most of the
alleged debts, claiming these debts were paid in full years ago. (SOR debts ¶¶ 1.e
and 1.g-1.h)
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old ship fitter for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in 2010 and has one daughter and three stepchildren. He
earned an Associate’s degree in 2007. (Items 2-3) He reported no military service. 
Since September 2012, Applicant has been employed by his current
contractor. (Items 2-3) Between September 2008 and September 2012, he was
employed as a security guard for a non-DOD security service.
Finances
While in college between August 2005 and July 2007, Applicant financed his
education with student loans. Altogether, Applicant accumulated $28,000 in student
loans (inclusive of accrued interest). Most of these student loans were paid. Credit
reports reveal he defaulted on one of his student loan accounts (SOR ¶ 1.e) This
student loan fell into default in November 2009, and was charged off by the creditor 
1 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD 4), dated December
10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued
eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were established to
supercede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures for
administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DoD 5220.6, subject to the
updated substantive changes in the guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were in
effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change the decision in this case. 
2
and assigned for collection to SOR creditor ¶ 1.e in September 2012. (Items 4-5) To
date, Applicant has not addressed any of his listed creditors or supplied explanations
for why he has not contacted any of his listed SOR creditors or provided any
persuasive explanations for why he has failed to do so. (Items 2-3) 
Besides his student loan debts, Applicant incurred a number of delinquent
consumer debts. Credit reports reveal that between 2011 and 2012, Applicant
accumulated seven delinquent debts exceeding $5,000. He has not addressed any of
these debts to date that he can document, and they remain outstanding.  (Items 3-5) 
Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling, developing a budget, or
completing a personal financial statement. Nor did he furnish any character
references, performance evaluations, or evidence of community contributions and
civic involvement. 
Policies
The SEAD 4, App. A, lists new AGs to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as
well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying if any, and many of the conditions
that could mitigate security concerns. 
These AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(d)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to
examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(d) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
3
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified and sensitive information. . . An individual who is
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-11
(1995).
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
4
Analysis  
Applicant is a ship fitter for a defense contractor who accumulated a number of
unexplained delinquent debts. His accumulation of delinquent debts between 2007
and 2009 and his failure to address these debts in a timely way warrant the
application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability to satisfy debts;” DC ¶19 (b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the
ability to do so, and DC ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). 
Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of his debts.
Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s incurred delinquencies and
his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly before receiving the SOR in April
2015. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only have most of
his listed debt delinquencies been ongoing before the issuance of the SOR in 2015,
but he failed to address them until after his receipt of the SOR.
 Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, no extenuating
circumstances can be traced to Applicant’s historical inability to pay off or otherwise
resolve his student loan and other listed debts.  Unavailable to Applicant is MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation . . ., and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has taken no responsible steps in resolving
his delinquent debts covered by ¶¶ 1.a-1.h. Mitigation credit is unavailable to
Applicant based on the evidence developed in this record.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount raised
security concerns over his finances. Because Applicant did not submit any evidence
of financial counseling, developing a budget, and other measures designed to assist
him in addressing his debts, considerations that might help to mitigate his failure or
inability to address his debts cannot be considered. Whole-person assessments are
intended to consider not only the developed adverse information covered in the SOR,
but other information as well about the applicant’s professional and personal history to
reach an overall assessment of security clearance eligibility. Such whole-person
5
considerations cannot be factored in to mitigate the adverse information covering
Applicant’s finances.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his lack of documented evidence of corrective actions
to address his listed delinquent debts, and the absence of sufficient whole-person
considerations to surmount financial concerns, overall conditions at this time preclude
making safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to repay his remaining
debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the minimum
requirements for holding a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:                   Against Applicant  
     
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
6
  
7
