 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ADP Case No. 15-08342 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
     For Government: Erin P. Thompson & Tovah A. Minster, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated concerns raised by her failure to list her past-due debts on her 
application for a public trust position, but her financial situation continues to raise a 
concern. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) recommending the denial of her application to occupy a public trust 
position. The SOR alleges concerns under the financial considerations and personal 
conduct guidelines. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On February 28, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was 
held. Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties were 
admitted into the administrative record without objection.1 At Applicant’s request, the 
record was kept open to give her the opportunity to submit additional documentation in 
support of her case. She did not submit any additional evidence. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on March 8, 2017, and the record closed on April 7, 2017.2 
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 – 5; Applicant’s Exhibits A – D. Prehearing correspondence, the notice of hearing, 
and case management order are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I – III. 
 
2 Tr. 52-55, 59-60 (discussion about post-hearing submission).  
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 28, graduated from high school in 2007 and then attended a technical 
college for a time, but did not earn a degree. She is a single mother of an eight-year-old 
son. She is employed as a clerk at a military hospital. She has been working in her current 
position since approximately December 2014. Her current manager provided a glowing 
recommendation, commenting favorably about Applicant’s reliability and dependability. 
Others, including a physician and a senior enlisted military member, also provided letters, 
describing Applicant’s work, reliability, and dependability in positive terms. Applicant 
earns about $35,000 annually, and lives with her mother and several other family 
members who all contribute to paying the rent and other household expenses. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began shortly after her son was born (premature). 
When Applicant returned to work, her son’s father was unreliable in helping care for their 
child. She lost her job (at the same location she is now employed) and was unemployed 
for a time. While unemployed, Applicant’s car was repossessed for non-payment and she 
became delinquent on several other debts.3 
 
The SOR lists three delinquent debts totaling about $14,000. The debt in SOR 1.a 
is the deficiency balance for the car that was repossessed after Applicant lost her job in 
2007. She thought that she was no longer liable for the debt after her mother, who was 
the primary debtor on the car loan, filed for bankruptcy. As for the other two SOR debts, 
a credit card account and a cell phone account that are in collections (1.b and 1.c), 
Applicant claimed that she had paid one of the debts by using her 2015 tax refund and 
was going to pay the other debt with her anticipated 2016 tax refund. She filed her 2016 
income tax returns shortly before the hearing, and promised to provide documentation 
post-hearing showing both debts were resolved. No such evidence was received.4  
 
As for her current financial situation, Applicant testified that, though she lives 
paycheck-to-paycheck, she is generally able to pay her recurring expenses and debts on 
time. With her June 2016 Answer, Applicant submitted a credit report that does not 
contain any negative entries. However, Applicant admitted at hearing that she had fallen 
behind on her student loans. She stated that she had taken action to address her student 
loan debts. As of the hearing, Applicant’s student loans were in a non-pay (forbearance) 
status, with monthly payments scheduled to begin on April 3, 2017. Applicant testified 
that she was in a position to pay her $35 monthly student loan debt after recently 
competing monthly payments for a T.V. that she purchased on store credit in 2015.5  
 
Applicant also admitted at hearing that she was delinquent on one of her current 
credit cards. She planned on using her anticipated tax refund to resolve this debt and the 
                                                          
3 Tr. 26-38; Exhibit 1, Section 13A; Exhibit C.  
 
4 Tr. 23-25, 39-44, 52-55, 59-60; Exhibit 3 at 6; Exhibit B. 
 
5 Tr. 47-51; Exhibit 3 at 3 (Applicant was two months past-due on her student loans when interviewed in 
August 2015); Exhibits A, B, D. 
 
3 
 
 
$979 collection account referenced in SOR 1.b. She had previously agreed to a payment 
plan with the creditor for this collection account, but was unable to make the required 
monthly payments. She promised to resolve the collection account and the new 
delinquent credit card debt by applying some of her anticipated $4,000 tax refund to these 
debts. She did not submit evidence post-hearing showing that she was repaying her 
student loans or satisfied the delinquent credit card debt and collection account.6 As of 
the hearing, Applicant had not obtained financial or debt counseling. She acknowledged 
that her financial problems were, in part, attributable to matters beyond her control, but 
also her own financial irresponsibility.7   
 
Applicant submitted an application for a public trust position in October 2014. In 
response to relevant questions, Applicant did not list the car repossession and the two 
collection accounts that are referenced in SOR 1.a – 1.c. Applicant admits she incorrectly 
answered the questions, but denies any intent to falsify. She discussed the car 
repossession, her belief that any debt associated with the repossessed car had been 
resolved though her mother’s bankruptcy, and the two collection accounts during an 
August 2015 background interview. She volunteered information about one of the 
collection accounts before the background investigator showed her a credit report 
containing derogatory credit information. She promised during this August 2015 interview 
to resolve the two collection accounts (SOR 1.b and 1.c) when she received her tax 
refund.8 These two collection accounts remain unresolved. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive) and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, through Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).9  
                                                          
6 Tr. 48-51; Exhibit B. Non-alleged matters (past-due student loan account and delinquent credit card) were 
only considered for the limited purpose of assessing mitigation and whole-person. 
 
7 Tr. 41-45. 
 
8 Tr. 23; Exhibit 1, Section 26; Exhibit 3 at 6-7. 
 
9 Pursuant to a Memorandum from the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for 
Counterintelligence and Security, dated November 19, 2004 (Memorandum), the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) is directed to utilize the provisions of the Directive, to include the current 
version of the adjudicative guidelines, to resolve contractor cases forwarded to it for a trustworthiness 
determination. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.1 (the current guidelines “shall be used by all authorized adjudicative 
agencies when rendering a determination for initial or continued eligibility . . . to hold a sensitive position.”); 
ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“the Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
 The DoD Consolidated Adjudications Facility used the previous version of the guidelines, which were in 
force at the time the SOR was issued, in adjudicating Applicant’s case. I have considered the previous 
version of the guidelines (Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, dated December 29, 2005), and my ultimate conclusion in this case would be the same. 
 
4 
 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. The 
standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available 
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.10  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a federal 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and whole-
person concept. In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
the guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.11 
 
The Directive sets forth the due process procedures that must be followed in all 
DOHA proceedings. Department Counsel must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts (i.e., SOR allegations denied by the applicant). While an applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate relevant conduct or circumstances that he or she admitted or proven by 
Department Counsel. An applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish 
their eligibility for a position of trust.12 Any doubt raised by the evidence, must be resolved 
by the judge in favor of the national security.13 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems raise concerns about her ability to hold a 
sensitive position. The financial considerations concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
                                                          
10 Memorandum; Directive, § 3.2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. ADP Case No. 14-00590 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2014) (“The 
standard applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988) regarding security clearances: such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly 
consistent with the interests of the national security’.”) 
 
11 See generally SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2.  
 
12 Directive, ¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15. See also ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017) (favorable 
decision reversed because Department Counsel failed to present evidence to substantiate denied SOR 
allegations); ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (rejecting Department Counsel’s argument 
that judge should have found against applicant based on non-alleged conduct). 
 
13 Directive, ¶ E3.1.25; SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 1(d). 
 
5 
 
 
 The concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise sensitive information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information.14 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all pertinent disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by long-term unemployment and 
underemployment following the birth her child, lack of financial support from the child’s 
father, and her own financial irresponsibility. She has started to take some steps to take 
control of her finances. Moreover, I recognize that the number of delinquent debts and 
their cumulative amount are relatively small. Yet, since the August 2015 background 
interview, Applicant has been aware that the two collection accounts listed on the SOR 
were an issue and could potentially place her job, which is dependent on obtaining a 
trustworthiness designation, in jeopardy. Two years have passed since that interview and, 
despite repeated promises to address the two collection accounts and having been 
provided ample time to submit supporting documentation, Applicant failed to provide 
evidence showing she has addressed these debts.  
 
Additionally, Applicant has not obtained financial counseling and her financial 
situation appears to be getting worst. (Contrast, the credit report Applicant submitted with 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
 
answer in June 2016, with, her February 2017 testimony, where she admitted a new 
delinquent credit card account.) AG ¶¶ 19(a) through 19(c) apply. None of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. 
 
Individuals applying for a sensitive position are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate concerns raised by their circumstances, to 
include the presence of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that 
they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted a position of trust.15  
 
Applicant failed to meet her burden of proof and persuasion. She may in the future 
be able to establish her eligibility for a position of trust by showing that she has addressed 
her past-due debts and is managing her personal finances in a responsible manner. At 
present, however, the questions and doubts about her eligibility, which were raised by the 
presence of delinquent debt, remain.16 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The adjudicative process relies on the honesty and candor of all applicants, and 
starts with the answers provided in the application for a position of trust. The deliberate 
falsification of an application raises a serious concern about the suitability of an applicant. 
See generally AG ¶¶ 15, 16(a).17 
 
 However, an omission standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant 
deliberately falsified their response to a question asked on the application. Instead, in 
assessing intent, an administrative judge must examine the relevant facts and 
circumstances surrounding the omission, including the person’s age, level of education, 
and work experience. An omission is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot the 
information, was unaware of the facts, inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood the 
question, or earnestly thought the matter did not need to be reported.18  
 
Applicant’s explanation for why she responded in the negative to questions on the 
application asking about delinquent debts was credible, reasonable, and consistent with 
other record evidence. Of note, after submitting her application, Applicant was interviewed 
by a background investigator. She self-reported one of the collection accounts at issue 
and then fully discussed her finances with the investigator. She was candid and 
forthcoming at hearing, including volunteering negative information about her finances. 
See generally AG ¶¶ 17(a), and 17(c) – (e).  
                                                          
15 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
16 In reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person factors in AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
17 See also SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(i) (falsifications and misrepresentations during the investigative or 
adjudicative stages raise heightened concerns about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness). 
 
18 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005).  
 
7 
 
 
 Accordingly, the Guideline E allegation is decided in Applicant’s favor. However, 
Applicant’s financial situation continues to leave me with questions and doubts about her 
present eligibility for a position of trust.19 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
19 I considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C. However, in light of Applicant’s repeated 
unkept promises to address the collection accounts, I do not find that any of the exceptions (such as, 
conditioning her eligibility on Applicant providing proof that she has addressed her past-due debts and is 
maintaining her financial stability) are warranted in this case. See generally SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h); 
contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) (under previous version of the 
guidelines, judges had “no authority to grant an interim, conditional or probationary clearance.”) 
