 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08467 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on November 29, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on February 13, 2017. After coordinating with the 
parties, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 28, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 4, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but she did not submit documentary 
evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. She 
did not submit any additional information. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 13, 2017.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since May 2013. She has an associate’s degree, which was 
awarded in 2007. She attended additional college classes in 2008 without earning 
another degree. She has lived with her boyfriend for about six years. She has two 
teenage children.1 
 
Applicant was unemployed from about June 2008 through May 2010. She has 
been consistently employed since May 2010. Her children have had some medical 
problems. She was arrested and convicted twice between 2008 and 2011 for driving 
under the influence (DUI). She paid about $6,500 in fines for the two convictions.2 
 
 The SOR alleges three medical debts totaling $483; two miscellaneous 
delinquent debts totaling $1,640; and a student loan that was $1,210 past due with a 
$13,529 balance. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. All of the debts are also listed 
on at least one credit report. 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
July 2014. She reported $30,399 in defaulted student loans. She wrote that she was 
“[t]rying to make monthly payments.”3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for her background investigation in October 2014. She 
discussed her financial problems. After she lost her job, she did not call and attempt to 
have her student loans deferred. She stated that she suffers from anxiety and has a 
hard time talking to people. She thought it was easier to ignore them. She told the 
investigator that she consolidated her student loans, and she was current on her 
payments.4 
 
Applicant’s mother passed away in 2014. Applicant and her two siblings inherited 
their mother’s house. Her mother provided that Applicant’s stepfather could live in the 
house provided he complied with certain conditions. He did not comply with the 
conditions, did not pay the mortgage loan, used drugs, and hoarded. Applicant and her 
siblings spent a large amount on attorney’s fees to evict him, hauling away his junk, and 
repairing the damages to the house. Applicant estimated her share at $30,000. She 
stated that she paid her student loans for about two years, but stopped paying them in 
about April 2015 because of the expenses associated with the house.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16-17, 27-28, 40-41; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 Tr. at 16, 28, 32; GE 1. The DUIs were not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. They will considered only for their effect on Applicant’s finances. 
 
3 GE 1.  
 
4 GE 2.  
 
5 Tr. at 21-25. 
 
3 
 
Applicant has been living in the house with her boyfriend and children since 
about March 2016. The house does not have a mortgage loan, and she does not pay 
rent to her siblings. She pays the property taxes and for the upkeep of the property.6  
 
Applicant inherited about $45,000 from her mother and her grandmother. She did 
not receive the first payment until February 2017. She testified that she consolidated 
several student loans into one loan of about $45,000. She stated, without corroborating 
documentation, that she has been paying an income-based $45 per month on the 
consolidated loan since about December 2016. She has at least one other student loan 
that has not been consolidated and is not being paid.7 
 
Applicant received counseling from a financial planner. She has not paid any of 
the non-student loans in the SOR. She stated that the SOR provided her with the 
names of her creditors. She indicated that she would use her inheritance to pay her 
debts. She was informed of the importance of documentation, and she was given more 
than two months after the hearing to submit documentary evidence, but she failed to 
submit anything.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 25-27.  
 
7 Tr. at 16-21, 27, 30-31, 36.  
 
8 Tr. at 16-18, 31, 34-40.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had financial problems including defaulted student loans and 
delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to her unemployment, her children’s 
medical problems, and the actions of her stepfather. However, she has been 
consistently employed since May 2010; she paid about $6,500 in fines for her two DUI 
convictions; and she received about $45,000 in inheritance.  
 
Applicant stated, without corroborating documentation, that she has been paying 
$45 per month on the consolidated student loan since about December 2016. She was 
informed of the importance of documentation, and she was given more than two months 
to submit documentary evidence, but she failed to submit anything. The Appeal Board 
has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2006)). She stated that she intended to use her inheritance to pay her debts. The 
 
6 
 
Appeal Board has further held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See 
ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-
08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)). There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
