 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-04733  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg R. Garner, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant encountered a number of financial issues in 2014, causing him to be 
temporarily unable to pay his mortgage. He obtained a loan modification in 2015 and 
has since made all payments as required. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is 
granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On June 21, 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On February 23, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant, through his counsel, answered the SOR on March 19, 2016. He 
denied both of the SOR allegations concerning delinquent debts, and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) On June 24, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on June 28, 2016, and received by him on July 17, 2016.1 The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant, through his counsel, responded to the FORM on June 20, 2016. He 
did not object to Items 1 through 7, which are admitted into evidence. Applicant 
submitted additional information in his FORM response, to which Department Counsel 
had no objection. That evidence is also admitted and will be considered along with the 
additional explanations and analysis provided by Applicant’s counsel in the response, 
which is marked Exhibit (AE) A. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 4, 2017.  
 
The SOR and FORM in this case were issued under the adjudicative guidelines 
that came into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent 
Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4.  
 
Due to the passage of time since Applicant responded to the FORM, and the 
implementation of the new SEAD 4 AG during that period, I notified both counsel on 
June 26, 2017, that I would reopen the record for fifteen days in order to permit 
submission of any desired new evidence or argument. In particular, I noted that 
anything addressing Applicant’s subsequent adherence to the payment requirements of 
his July 2015 modified mortgage loan agreement would be pertinent under the new 
language of the mitigating factor in AG ¶ 20(d), which added the language, “and is 
adhering to.” On July 10, 2017, Applicant’s counsel responded with evidence 
demonstrating that Applicant remains in good standing on his modified mortgage loan 
payments. Department Counsel had no objection to this evidence, which is marked AE 
B and admitted together with the associated email correspondence. 
 
I considered the previous eligibility guidelines, as well as the new SEAD 4 AG, in 
adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the currently 
effective SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
                                                 
1 The FORM was mistakenly mailed to Applicant instead of his counsel by a former DOHA legal assistant, 
who did not realize that Applicant was represented. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He is married, with no children. He earned an 
associate’s degree in 1999, a bachelor’s degree in 2002, and a master’s degree in 
2007. He has worked for major defense contractors since June 2002, and has held a 
security clearance without incident during that employment. He honorably served on 
active duty in the U.S. Navy from July 1993 to August 1996, and in the U.S. Navy 
Reserve from then until August 2006. (Item 4.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife encountered a short-term financial hardship from April 
2014 to January 2015. This hardship was caused by unforeseen family medical issues; 
initiation of payments to correct a mistake on their 2012 Federal income tax return; the 
end of deferment on student loans Applicant incurred while pursuing his Ph.D. degree; 
and the provision of financial support to his brother and mother to relieve temporary 
severe hardships. Details of these circumstances were provided in AE A.  
 
 As a result of these issues, Applicant was temporarily unable to continue making 
timely payments on his home mortgage loan. He also inadvertently missed a payment 
on a credit card account, resulting in a $104 delinquency. In his answer to the SOR, he 
provided proof that he was current on that credit card account, and had obtained a 
mortgage loan modification agreement that brought that debt back into good standing. 
(Item 3.)      
 
 On July 10, 2017, Applicant’s counsel provided documentation showing that 
Applicant has continued to make all required payments under the terms of his modified 
mortgage loan agreement. (AE B.) The modification went into effect on July 14, 2015, 
and called for monthly payments of $886.37 toward principal, interest, and escrow funds 
starting August 1, 2015. (Item 3.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was temporarily unable to meet his mortgage payments in 2014 and 
2015, creating a brief history of not meeting financial obligations. These facts establish 
prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to 
Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial issues arose from a series of unforeseen problems that 
combined to create a temporary inability to make his mortgage payments in 2014, all of 
which have been resolved. He successfully negotiated a mortgage loan modification 
agreement in 2015, and has made all payments under that contract. His credit card 
account was only temporarily delinquent due to one inadvertently missed monthly 
payment.  
 
Applicant acted responsibly under unforeseen difficult circumstances that were 
largely beyond his control, and there are clear indications that his financial issues are 
resolved. The record establishes clear mitigation of financial security concerns under 
the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the financial issues created a series 
of unforeseeable problems in 2014. The likelihood that financial problems will recur is 
minimal; and the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is eliminated by the 
resolution of Applicant’s formerly outstanding debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security 
clearance. He fully met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
