                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 15-06008
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case.  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 20 August 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-3.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017.
This decision is issued under the original AG, but I have examined the new AG to ensure that I would not
reach a different result if I issued this decision under the new AG. I would not rule differently under either set
of AG.
1
closed 2 December 2016, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
provided no additional documentation. DOHA assigned the case to me 8 August 2017.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegation. He is a 53-year-old production planner
employed by a defense contractor since January 2015. He was previously employed by
different defense contractors from August 1989 to June 2012, and from December 2012
to October 2014. He has not previously held a clearance. Apparently, neither of the two
earlier jobs required a clearance, but he now requires one for his employment.
Applicant used marijuana at varying frequencies from June 1979 to August
2014.  He also bought user amounts of marijuana from February 2008 to October3
2011.  He used marijuana at home, frequently with his wife, to help him deal with4
anxiety and stress. He occasionally used in social settings. He reported his marijuana
use on his March 2015 clearance application (Item 2), on which he was unequivocal
about his future intent, recognizing that continued marijuana use was incompatible with
holding a clearance. He confirmed these statements during a May 2015 interview with a
Government investigator (Item 3). He also stated that his wife stopped using marijuana
when he did, and that he had not seen the friend from whom he bought the marijuana
since 2013.
  
Applicant submitted no work or character references, and provided no evidence
of any community involvement.
Policies
The AG list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for access to classified
information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and mitigating conditions
under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented. Each decision must
also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the factors listed in AG ¶
2(d). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case can be
measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or denial of a
clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant
adjudicative guideline is Guideline H (Drug Involvement).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
On his March 2015 clearance application (Item 2), he stated that there were periods when he did not use for3
years at a time, and periods when he used several times weekly.
The drug use and drug purchase questions ask for use or purchase within the last seven years, but then ask4
specifically for the dates of first use and purchase. Applicant followed the instructions on his drug use, but
limited his answer on his drug purchases to the last seven years, leaving open the issue of how he obtained
his marijuana between June 1979 and February 2008.
2
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline H, by
demonstrating Applicant’s illegal drug abuse between June 1979 and August 2014, and
his illegal drug purchases between at least February 2008 and October 2011, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns.  Applicant used marijuana for 35 years. 6
His use was illegal at all times. His use covered periods that he was employed by
defense contractors, and despite the fact that he did not hold a clearance, it is unlikely
that either employer tolerated illegal drug involvement. Moreover, Applicant has only
been drug free for little more than a year.
Drug involvement mitigating conditions give little support to Applicant. His illegal
drug abuse was recent, occasionally frequent, and the facts do not support
circumstances (stress, anxiety) unlikely to recur.  The record contains no evidence of7
what steps Applicant has taken to address his stress and anxiety without using
marijuana. Further, his pattern of abstinence is less than two years, and while he has
disassociated himself from his supplier, he still lives with his wife in the environment
where most of his use occurred. Finally, his strongly-stated disavowal of future use does
not constitute a statement of intent, either within the old guidelines or the new
guidelines.  Under the circumstances,  I cannot conclude Applicant is unlikely to abuse8
illegal drugs in the future. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline H against Applicant.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
¶25(a) any substance misuse; (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including . . . purchase. . . :6
¶26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that7
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment [Emphasis supplied];
¶26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance misuse, provides evidence8
of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs were used; and (3) a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of
national security eligibility;
3
 
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs a-b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
4
