 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 15-04407 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding criminal conduct, but failed to 
mitigate the security concerns regarding financial considerations. Eligibility for a security 
clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated September 30, 2014). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR, as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated April 20, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on July 29, 2016, and he was afforded 
an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, 
Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous Adjudicative 
Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on August 13, 2016. 
Applicant’s response was due on September 12, 2016. Applicant failed to submit any 
response. The case was assigned to me on July 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.j.) and one of the 
factual allegations pertaining to criminal conduct (¶ 2.a.) of the SOR. He also furnished 
comments regarding the remaining allegation. Applicant’s admissions and comments are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a help 
desk analyst with the company since December 2014. He previously held a position of 
help desk specialist with another company from May 2012 until December 2014. He is a 
2004 high school graduate, and he has several college credits, but no degree. Applicant 
enlisted in the U.S. Army in May 2004, and he served on active duty until May 2012, at 
which time, as a specialist, he was honorably discharged. He was granted a secret 
security clearance in 2005. Applicant was married in August 2007, and divorced in 
January 2013. He has two daughters, born in 2008 and 2011.  
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 Item 1 (Answer to the SOR, dated April 20, 2016). 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations4 
It is unclear what Applicant’s finances were like before they deteriorated in 2014. 
A review of his October 2014 credit report reveals a number of accounts that became 
delinquent between 2009 and 2012. Applicant claimed that his financial issues arose as 
a result of his divorce in January 2013 when he had to take on the marital debts (actually 
two credit cards, while his wife assumed responsibility for one credit card) and lost his 
wife’s income. He added that about 18 months before September 2014, he had “very little 
negative debt – characterized by him as decent credit – and he was able to meet his 
financial obligations without issue. He said that since his divorce, he had a difficult time 
adjusting and that he was working towards getting back above water in terms of his 
finances.5 The Final Decree of Divorce included an Income Assignment Order issued by 
a chancellor directing that Applicant’s employer deduct $614 per month for child support 
to be sent to the appropriate state office, but that Order was amended the judge to direct 
payments of $800 per month. 
Applicant contended that the required monthly payments for the marital debts he 
was assigned came to approximately $2,431. In order to make the required payments, he 
obtained a loan. His monthly bills, including rent, car, utilities, cell phone, and loan 
repayment, came to $1,600, leaving him only $300 per month for food, gasoline, and 
other expenses. It became evident to him that he did not have enough funds to meet all 
of his financial obligations. In an effort to lower his expenses, Applicant took the following 
actions: to save money on gas, he purchased a new vehicle, delaying payments for 90 
days, but increasing his car payment, and expecting the increase to be offset by savings 
in gasoline; he opened two new credit cards for emergencies; and took out another 
personal loan. Things failed to work out as he anticipated, and he took other actions in an 
attempt to catch up. A series of payday loans and a refinanced earlier loan merely 
increased his problems. Applicant was taking out loans to cover earlier loans, and his 
tactics were not working. He defaulted on his car loan and several other accounts. He 
used his income tax refund to purchase a new vehicle, but it broke down. He purchased 
another vehicle, but the payment was too high.  
Applicant was terminated by his employer in December 2014 because, as a 
disgruntled employee, he exposed confidential and personal information regarding other 
employees to his supervisor. Although he quickly found another job, his hourly wage was 
reduced to $18. 
Applicant admitted that he could have made better financial decisions. He claimed 
that he is unlikely to repeat any of the behaviors that led him to the situation which he is. 
While he offered no evidence – written or verbal – of attempting to contact any of his 
creditors in an effort to reach repayment agreements or settlements, or to make any 
payments, Applicant contended that he developed and enacted a plan to take care of his 
                                                          
4 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 2, supra note 1; Item 1, supra note 3; Item 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, 
dated October 8, 2014); Item 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 26, 2016); TransUnion Credit Report, dated April 
19, 2016, attached to Item 1.  
 
5 Item 2, supra note 1, at 43; Item 1, supra note 3. 
 
4 
                                      
 
debts. His plan was to engage the services of a nationally-known credit repair firm to 
dispute the validation of the debts, and the amounts reflected for those debts, listed in his 
credit reports, and then have his remaining debts consolidated. Such actions generally 
result in the removal of some accounts for a variety of reasons. He enrolled in the credit 
repair program on April 16, 2016.6 Although Applicant had five months to submit 
documentation regarding actions supposedly taken and results achieved in resolving his 
debts, Applicant failed to submit any such documentation. 
The SOR identified ten delinquent debts that had been placed for collection or 
charged off, as generally reflected by his October 2014 credit report or his March 2016 
credit report. There is no evidence that there were any efforts made by Applicant to reach 
repayment agreements or settlements, or to make any payments, for any of those debts, 
totaling approximately $35,000. Those debts are described below. 
There is an automobile loan with a high credit of $25,302 that was placed for 
collection and $13,044 was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.a.); there is an unspecified type of 
account with a high credit of $9,891 and past-due and unpaid balance of $9,831 that was 
placed for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 1.b.); there is an unspecified type of account 
with a high credit of $5,621 and past-due and unpaid balance of $6,712 that was placed 
for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 1.c.); there is an automobile loan account with an 
unpaid balance of $3,125 that was placed for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 1.d.); 
there is a bank-issued credit card with a $500 credit limit and past-due and unpaid balance 
of $590 that was placed for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 1.e.); there is an 
unspecified type of account with a past-due and unpaid balance of $495 that was placed 
for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 1.f.); there is an unspecified type of credit union 
account with a past-due and unpaid balance of $432 that was placed for collection and 
charged off (SOR ¶ 1.g.); there is an unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance 
of $255 (SOR ¶ 1.h.); there is a bank-issued credit card with a $300 credit limit and past-
due and unpaid balance of $483 that was placed for collection and charged off (SOR ¶ 
1.i.); and there is a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of $62 that was 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.j.). None of the accounts has been resolved. 
Applicant contends that his annual salary is now $56,500 and that he is paying his 
current bills on time. Nevertheless, Applicant did not submit a Personal Financial 
Statement to reflect his net monthly income; monthly expenses; or any monthly remainder 
that might be available for discretionary spending or savings. There is no evidence of a 
budget. There is no evidence of any financial counseling. As Applicant noted, he also has 
one delinquent account for $4,532 for a broken lease that was not mentioned in the SOR. 
Under the circumstances, it appears that Applicant’s finances are still not under control. 
After a multi-year period of ignoring his delinquent debts, essentially attributing his 
inaction to a divorce and insufficient funds, Applicant’s first order of business was not to 
contact his creditors, but apparently to dispute his delinquent accounts to have them 
removed from his credit reports. In the absence of documentation pertaining to Applicant’s 
                                                          
6 Engagement Agreement and Limited Designation of Agency, dated April 16, 2016, attached to Item 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
delinquent accounts, and his current financial situation, it remains unclear if Applicant’s 
finances are under control.  
Criminal Conduct 
 In March 2013, when Applicant was exercising his weekend parental visitation, he 
and his ex-wife got into an argument over the visitation schedule and parenting plan they 
had in place. In an effort to end the argument, he attempted to leave with his children, 
carrying the youngest in his arms. As he approached his car, his ex-wife approached him 
from behind and began pulling his daughter out of his arms. In anticipation of dropping 
her, Applicant instinctively kicked his ex-wife in the shin to get her to release the child. 
His ex-wife called the police. Applicant was arrested and charged with domestic assault, 
a misdemeanor. Applicant was ordered to attend eight anger management classes, and 
he did so in June and July 2013. In August 2013, the charge was dismissed nolle 
prosequi. Applicant acknowledged that what he did was shameful and ill-advised. He 
vowed that such conduct will never recur. 
 
 In September 2014, Applicant was again exercising his parental visitation. One 
night, his youngest daughter woke up yelling and crying for a lengthy period, and he was 
unable to calm her down. He held her too tightly in an effort to stop her from crying. The 
next day, when he dropped her off for childcare, she had a mark on her face from the 
previous evening. The childcare provider alerted the department of children’s services, 
and Applicant was charged with child abuse and ordered to appear in court in February 
2015. He was again ordered to take anger management classes. Applicant failed to 
submit documentation to reflect the disposition of the charge. Applicant stated that his 
actions, even unintentionally, caused him “an inexpressible amount of grief.”  
Character References 
 Applicant’s program manager, project manager, and team lead are highly 
supportive of Applicant. They characterized him as very trustworthy, dedicated, reliable, 
responsible, cheerful, loyal, smart, hard-working, and conscientious. He accepts 
additional burdens without protest, and demonstrates a level of responsibility that goes 
above and beyond his assigned duties.7  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”8 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
                                                          
7 Character References, various dates, attached to Item 1. 
 
8 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”9   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”10 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.11  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12  
                                                          
9 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
10 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. “Consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other negative financial indicators” 
may raise concerns under ¶ 19(e). Applicant was taking out loans to cover earlier loans. 
His failure to satisfy all of his debts allowed them to become delinquent. Accounts were 
placed for collection or charged off. At least one automobile was repossessed. AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) apply; AG ¶¶ 19(b) and 19(e) partially apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
                                                          
13 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”14 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. None of the remaining mitigating conditions apply. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 
about 2009 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent,” or that it is “unlikely to recur.” He attributed his eventual financial difficulties 
to his January 2013 divorce; the loss of his ex-wife’s income; and his court-ordered child 
support, for leaving him with insufficient funds to manage his debts. He also was 
seemingly naive in his financial habits by taking out loans to cover earlier loans, and 
foolish in purchasing vehicles when he should have realized that he would not have 
sufficient funds to make his monthly payments. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. There is no documentary evidence to support any good-faith efforts to 
address his debts. Applicant’s only proven action was to engage the support of a credit 
repair company to dispute nearly all of the accounts appearing in Applicant’s credit report. 
None of the disputes sets forth a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debts, and there is no documented proof to substantiate that disputes were made or, 
if they were, the bases of those disputes. That position indicates the absence of any 
priority to timely address his aging debts. There is also an inference that he is simply 
waiting for the debts to drop off his credit reports.  
                                                          
14 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
 Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. 
In this instance, there are no references to a plan other than to remove the debts from 
Applicant’s credit reports, and there are lengthy periods of inactivity. 
 
There is little evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. Under the circumstances, Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to 
address nearly all of his delinquent accounts and by failing to initiate meaningful efforts 
to work with his older creditors.15 He failed to submit documentation to support his 
purported efforts regarding all of his debts. Applicant’s actions, or relative inaction, under 
the circumstances casts substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.16 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
 
The guideline notes a condition under AG ¶ 31 that could raise security concerns 
in this case: AG ¶ 31(b) “evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.” 
 
 There are two incidents in March 2013 and September 2014 involving actions by 
Applicant that resulted in intervention by local authorities. They both involved his exercise 
of parental visitation, kicking his ex-wife or squeezing his daughter to calm her down, and 
they both resulted in Applicant’s court-mandated attendance at anger management 
classes. The 2013 incident charge was dismissed nolle prosequi. Applicant failed to 
submit documentation to reflect the disposition of the September 2014 charge. Applicant 
acknowledged that what he did in 2013 was shameful and ill-advised, and that his 2014 
                                                          
15 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
actions, even unintentionally, caused him “an inexpressible amount of grief.” He vowed 
that such conduct will never recur. AG ¶ 31(b) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 32 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from Criminal Conduct: AG ¶ 32(a) “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; AG ¶ 32(c) “no reliable evidence to support 
that the individual committed the offense;” and AG ¶ 32(d):  
 
there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
I have concluded that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply to both incidents, and that AG 
¶ 32(c) partially applies to the 2014 incident. Applicant’s criminal activity was exclusively 
associated with his exercise of parental visitation rights. His reaction to his wife’s 
attempted interference with his efforts to exercise his rights and to avoid a confrontation 
with her was not an intentional kicking, but rather an instinctive one. Considering the 
court’s resolution of the charge, there is support for Applicant’s position, reaction, and 
ultimate acknowledgment that what he had done was shameful and ill-advised, but it did 
occur. Regarding the charge of child abuse, the initial information was derived from 
Applicant’s recitation of the facts as he remembered them. There is no documentation 
from the department of children’s services, police, or courts. Applicant denied the 
allegation in the SOR. He candidly reported the 2013 incident in his e-QIP. Recognizing 
the Government’s burden of proving the child abuse allegation, I have concluded that 
Department Counsel has failed to carry that burden. Applicant has apparently turned his 
relationship with his ex-wife around and now has a stable lifestyle and relationship with 
her and their two children; he has rehabilitated himself by avoiding further criminal or 
domestic violence activity for the past three years, or longer. In addition, he has 
established a good employment record with his employer and coworkers, and is well-
liked. Applicant’s criminal conduct, under the circumstances, no longer casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
11 
                                      
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.17   
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no 
evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected 
information. He candidly acknowledged having financial issues and criminal conduct 
issues when he completed his e-QIP. He has established a good employment record with 
his employer and coworkers, and is well-liked. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. During an unspecified period before his divorce in 2013, as well as following 
the divorce, he took out loans to cover earlier loans. His failure to satisfy all of his debts 
allowed them to become delinquent. Accounts were placed for collection or charged off. 
At least one automobile was repossessed. He submitted no documentary evidence to 
support any good-faith efforts to address his debts. Applicant’s only proven action was to 
engage the support of a credit repair company to dispute nearly all of the accounts 
appearing in Applicant’s credit report. There is no reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debts, and there is no documented proof to substantiate that 
disputes were made or, if they were, the bases of those disputes. There is no evidence of 
financial counseling. There are also two incidents in March 2013 and September 2014 
involving actions by Applicant that resulted in intervention by local authorities. They both 
involved his exercise of parental visitation, kicking his ex-wife or squeezing his daughter 
to calm her down, and they both resulted in Applicant’s court-mandated attendance at 
anger management classes. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:18 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
                                                          
17 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a very poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, by failing to address his debts, except by engaging a firm to dispute 
those debts.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, while I conclude 
that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct, I also 
conclude that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
