 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07079 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 8, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 21, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.1 (Item 1.) The SOR 
further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 On May 17, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR, and she 
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.)  
On August 15, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant 
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on September 22, 2016. Applicant 
submitted one additional document, a letter from, her which has been identified and 
entered into evidence without objection as Item A. The case was assigned to this 
Administrative Judge on June 5, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 In the FORM, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to India. Department Counsel provided a summary of the facts, supported 
by Item 5. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 38 years old. She was born in India. She moved to the United States 
in 2002, and she became a naturalized United States citizen in 2010. Applicant is 
married, and she and her husband have two children. Applicant's husband was born in 
India, and her husband is an Indian citizen. Her two children are United States born 
citizens. She is employed by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security 
clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector. (Items 3 and 4.) 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence  
 
 The SOR lists seven allegations regarding Foreign Influence, under Adjudicative 
Guideline B:  
 
 1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s parents and three siblings are 
citizens and residents of India. Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, and she 
wrote that this should not be a concern because her husband has lived in the United 
States for 16 years; she has lived in the United States for 13 years; and her two children 
are United States born citizens. She also added that they are going to live the rest of 
their lives in the United States. (Item 3.) 
 
 In a post-FORM submission, Applicant wrote that her elder sister works in a 
branch of the Indian government as a civil engineer where she creates floor plans for 
construction. Applicant's younger sister was working for a bank, but she resigned her 
positon six months ago, as she has become pregnant and plans to be a housewife. 
(Item A.) 
 
 
3 
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and 
residents of India. Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR, and she added the 
same answer concerning them that she had provided to 1.a., above. (Item 3.) 
 
 In her post-FORM submission, Applicant wrote that her father-in-law was a 
farmer but is now weak and sick, has had bypass surgery, and has stopped working. 
(Item A.)  
 
 2.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant and her spouse maintain a bank 
account in India with an approximate value of $6,000. Applicant admitted this allegation 
in her RSOR, and she wrote that this money is kept there for medical emergencies for 
her parents. Her father is 74 and her mother is 66; they have no income and are 
financially dependent on her.  (Item 3.) 
 
 2.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s spouse maintains five bank accounts 
in India with an approximate value of $27,000. Applicant admitted this allegation in her 
RSOR, and she wrote that her husband is the eldest son in his family, and he is 
responsible to take care of his parents and siblings.  She added that they are financially 
dependent on her husband, as her father-in-law is retired and has no income. (Item 3.) 
 
 2.e. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s spouse owns eight properties in 
India with an approximate value of $560,000. Applicant admitted this allegation in her 
RSOR, and she wrote that most of the property was inherited from Applicant's 
husband’s father and a few were bought in Applicant's husband’s name before he 
moved to the United States. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant wrote that of the eight properties owned by her husband, five of them 
were inherited from his father, and three were purchased directly by Applicant's 
husband. (Item A.) 
 
 2.f. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s spouse owns an Indian life insurance 
policy with an approximate value of $9,000. Applicant admitted this allegation in her 
RSOR, and she wrote that her husband purchased this policy before he moved to the 
United States. He has not cancelled the policy, because if he did he would lose all the 
money paid for the policy many years ago. (Item 3.) 
 
 Finally, Applicant wrote that in 2004, before she became a United States citizens 
she and her husband had contemplated moving back to India, which is the reason they 
invested in India. Subsequently, they had two children, purchased a house in the United 
States, and decided to stay in the United States. She also pledged to be loyal and 
honest to the United States, as she would like to work for this country. (Item A.)   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
4 
 
Current Status of India 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding India. According to its 
constitution, India is a “sovereign, socialist secular democratic republic.” It is a 
multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy and has a population of approximately 1.1 
billion people. The United States recognizes India as a key to interests of the U.S., and 
it has sought to strengthen its relationship with India. However, differences do remain 
between the two countries, including the concern of the U.S. over India’s nuclear 
weapons program, its abuses of human rights, and its continued, increasing cooperation 
with Iran. Finally, India has been identified as one of the most active collectors of 
sensitive U.S. economic and proprietary information. (Item 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
5 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Disqualifying conditions (b) and (f) are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; 
 
 
6 
 
(d) counterintelligence information, whether classified or unclassified, that 
indicates the individual's access to classified information or eligibility for a 
sensitive position may involve unacceptable risk to national security; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest;  
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence entity; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling or residing outside the U.S., that may 
make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
 
  Applicant has a significant number of close family members, including her 
parents, three siblings, and parents-in-law, who are citizens and residents of India. Both 
her parents and her husband’s parents rely on the financial support of Applicant and her 
husband. Additionally, Applicant and her husband have substantial financial and 
property interests in India. Applicant and her husband do own a home in the United 
States, but the value of the home is unknown. Meanwhile the value of the assets in 
India is worth more than $600,000. Applicant's familial ties to the United States are 
limited to only her husband, who is not a United States citizen, and their two children. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
 
7 
 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Because of the strong familial ties to India and the substantial financial and 
property interests in India, I do not find that any of the mitigating factors are applicable 
in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
 
8 
 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign 
Influence security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
