 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-07298 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions from 2008 to November 2016 
while holding a security clearance. He was arrested three times for driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI) from 1984 to 2013, and he continues to drink alcohol to 
intoxication about twice a week. Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use and two of 
his DUIs on his December 19, 2014 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) 
or security clearance application (SCA); however, he made prompt voluntary disclosures 
during his Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI). 
Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, drug involvement and 
alcohol consumption security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 7, 2007, and December 19, 2014, Applicant completed and signed SCAs. 
(Government Exhibits 1 and 2) On December 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 
20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
 
2                                         
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines H (drug involvement), G 
(alcohol consumption), and E (personal conduct). 
 
On January 23, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and on February 
10, 2017, Department Counsel requested a hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 12) On March 31, 
2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 24, 2017, the case was 
assigned to me. On April 24, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for May 4, 2017. (HE 1) Applicant waived 
his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. (Tr. 14-15) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 12, 17; GE 1-5) On May 15, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the hearing 
transcript.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, 
3.a, and 3.b. (HE 3) He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 59 years old, and he has been employed by a DOD contractor or by 
DOD for 28 years. (Tr. 6, 19) His current title is senior mechanic. (Tr. 19) In 1975, he 
graduated from high school, and in 1989, he received an associate’s degree in electronics 
engineering. (Tr. 6-7) He served in the Navy from 1978 to 1987 with a brief break in 
service, and he received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 8-9) In 1991, he married, and in 
1999, he divorced. (Tr. 7) His children are ages 19 and 23. (Tr. 7) He has held a security 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3                                         
 
clearance from about 2007 to 2017 and when he was in the Navy. (Tr. 21-22) There is no 
evidence of security violations. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant used marijuana from about 2007 to about November 2016 with his 
girlfriend on about a monthly basis because she wanted him to use marijuana with her. 
(Tr. 23-28, 33-34, 46) He has not used marijuana after receipt of the SOR. (Tr. 46) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
In 1984, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) 
when he was in the Navy. (Tr. 34-35) He received alcohol-related counseling, and he 
completed probation and community service. (Tr. 35) 
 
In 2009, Applicant was arrested for DUI. (Tr. 36) He attended an alcohol-education 
course. (Tr. 36, 42) He paid a fine; his driver’s license was suspended for 30 days; and 
he received an expungement of his record. (Tr. 36)  
 
In November 2013, Applicant was arrested for DUI. (Tr. 37) His breathalyzer test 
was .11 or .12. (Tr. 38)3 He was convicted of DUI. (Tr. 38) He consumes beer every day, 
and he becomes intoxicated “maybe twice a week.” (Tr. 39) He becomes intoxicated after 
drinking three beers and two shots of whiskey. (Tr. 40) He attended an alcohol education 
class after the November 2013 DUI. (Tr. 41, 42) 
 
After Applicant was divorced he went on a three-day alcohol binge. (Tr. 43) After 
the binge, he was hospitalized for five days for stress and excessive alcohol consumption. 
(Tr. 44) When he drinks alcohol away from home, he intends to stop drinking and wait 
until he believes he is sufficiently sober to drive home. (Tr. 48-49)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant did not disclose marijuana use on his June 6, 2007 SCA. (GE 2) He was 
unclear about when he began using marijuana with his girlfriend, and the record does not 
establish he provided false information on his June 6, 2007 SCA when he denied illegal 
drug use in the previous seven years.  
 
On his December 19, 2014 SCA, Applicant denied that he used marijuana in the 
previous seven years, and he denied using marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
(Tr. 31-32; GE 1) At the time he failed to disclose his marijuana use on his SCA, he was 
thinking his marijuana use was infrequent, and his frequency of marijuana use was not 
high enough to necessitate disclosure. (Tr. 45)  
  
                                            
3 In his December 19, 2014 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security 
clearance application (SCA), Applicant said his breathalyzer result was .16. (GE 1) He disclosed the 1984 
DUI on his June 6, 2007 SCA. (GE 2) 
 
4                                         
 
Applicant’s December 19, 2014 SCA asked about DUIs. (GE 1) He did not disclose 
his 1984 DUI because it was almost 30 years ago, and he did not disclose his 2009 DUI 
because of the expungement of his record. (Tr. 36-37, 44) He did not notice the 
requirement in his SCA to list expunged offenses. (Tr. 44-45) He disclosed the November 
2013 DUI on his SCA. (Tr. 37)  
 
During his April 21, 2015 OPM PSI, Applicant volunteered that he was arrested for 
DUI in 2009; however, he did not volunteer information about his 1984 DUI.4 He noted 
that he consumed one 32-ounce beer, three whiskey shots, and three 12-ounce beers 
over a five-hour period on April 5, 2015. He volunteered that he smoked marijuana two 
weeks before his OPM PSI. (GE 3) He also volunteered that he smoked marijuana on a 
monthly basis with his girlfriend, and he intended not to use marijuana in the future. DOHA 
provided a copy of the OPM PSI to Applicant, and he provided some corrections. He did 
not make any corrections to the portions related to his alcohol or marijuana use.   
 
Applicant said he is reliable and trustworthy. (Tr. 50) He has learned from his 
mistakes. (Tr. 50) He did not intend to deceive the Government on his SCA. (Tr. 50) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
                                            
4 The source for all of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s April 21, 2015 Office of 
Personnel Management personal subject interview. (GE 3) 
 
5                                         
 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 provides three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);” “(c) illegal 
possession of a controlled substance . . . ;” and “(f) any illegal drug use while granted 
access to classified information or holding a sensitive position.” 
 
 
6                                         
 
Applicant’s SOR response, OPM PSI, and hearing record establish Applicant 
possessed and used marijuana5 on numerous occasions while holding a security 
clearance. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(f) are established.  
 
AG ¶ 26 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
                                            
 5 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 
21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement 
Administration listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales 
v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
7                                         
 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence 
of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation.”6 
 
There is no evidence of Applicant’s marijuana use after November 2016. AG ¶ 
26(a) does not apply because his marijuana possession and use is recent.   
 
 AG ¶¶ 26(b), 26(c), and 26(d) are not fully applicable. Applicant did not abuse 
drugs after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. Marijuana was 
never lawfully prescribed for him under federal law. He said he ended his association with 
his drug-using girlfriend; however, that relationship ended within the previous year.  
     
                                            
6 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, 
and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated: 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage of 
three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel the 
administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of law, 
the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply that 
mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR Case 
No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a rational 
basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at alcohol 
rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the administrative 
judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency analysis of an 
administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an unfavorable 
security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use was not 
mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
8                                         
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant used marijuana from about 
2007 to about November 2016 with his girlfriend on about a monthly basis because she 
wanted him to use marijuana with her. He has not used marijuana after receipt of the 
SOR. He held a security clearance from 2007 to November 2016. Drug involvement 
security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 described the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” AG ¶ 22 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence . . . regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol use 
or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;” and “(c) habitual 
or binge consumption7 of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether 
the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder.”  
 
  An Administrative “Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the 
applicant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines and an 
applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted). 
 
  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. Applicant’s has three DUI arrests. When Applicant 
was arrested in November 2013, his breathalyzer test was at least .11 or .12, establishing 
that he engaged in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired judgment. He 
also described binge alcohol consumption to the OPM investigator in 2015 and at his 
hearing.   
 
AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
                                            
7 Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Adjudicative Guidelines, the generally 
accepted definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA 
Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/winter2004/ 
NewsletterNumber3.pdf. “Binge drinking is the most common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United 
States.” See the Center for Disease Control website, (stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism defines binge drinking as a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration 
(BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and 
when women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-
drinking.htm. 
 
9                                         
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant was arrested for DUI in 
1984, 2009, and November 2013. After each DUI, he received education about alcohol 
use. He noted that he consumed one 32-ounce beer, three whiskey shots, and three 12-
ounce beers over a five-hour period on April 5, 2015. He consumes beer every day, and 
he becomes intoxicated “maybe twice a week.” He becomes intoxicated after drinking 
three beers and two shots of whiskey. When he drinks alcohol away from home, he 
intends to stop drinking and wait until he believes he is sufficiently sober to drive home. 
He is not currently participating in an alcohol counseling or treatment program. Additional 
DUIs and alcohol-related problems are likely to occur and continue to cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. Alcohol consumption security 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”8 Applicant admitted that 
                                            
8 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
 
10                                         
 
he failed to disclose his history of marijuana use while holding a security clearance on his 
December 19, 2014 SCA. He also admitted that he failed to disclose his DUIs in 1984 
and 2009 on this same SCA. He was unclear about when he began using marijuana with 
his girlfriend, and the record does not establish he provided false information on his June 
6, 2007 SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) is established with respect to his omissions on his December 
19, 2014 SCA. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or 
group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 3.e, 3.f, and 3.g cross-allege under the personal conduct guideline the 
same conduct alleged under the drug involvement and alcohol consumption guidelines. 
All of Applicant’s conduct causing a security concern in SOR ¶¶ 3.e, 3.f, and 3.g is 
explicitly covered under Guidelines H and G, and that conduct is sufficient to warrant 
revocation of his security clearance under those guidelines. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not 
apply. Applicant’s involvement with marijuana and excessive alcohol consumption affects 
his professional and community standing. However, this conduct does not create a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because security officials are aware 
of it. AG ¶ 16(e) is not established. Guidelines H, G, and E address identical issues 
                                            
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
11                                         
 
involving judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Guideline E concerns constitute a 
duplication of the concerns under Guidelines H and G, and accordingly, personal conduct 
security concerns in SOR ¶¶ 3.e, 3.f, and 3.g are found for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
   
AG ¶ 17(a) applies to his failure to disclose his history of marijuana use on his 
SCA. The evidence that he used marijuana was first disclosed on his April 21, 2015 OPM 
PSI. He disclosed continuing marijuana use until two weeks before his OPM PSI. The 
purpose of AG ¶ 17(a) is to encourage disclosure. He also volunteered in his OPM PSI 
information about his history of excessive alcohol consumption and his 2009 DUI. He was 
candid and frank on his April 21, 2015 OPM PSI. Personal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated.   
 
  
 
12                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines H, G, 
and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old, and he has been employed for a DOD contractor or for 
DOD for 28 years. His current title is senior mechanic. In 1989, he received an associate’s 
degree in electronics engineering. He served in the Navy from 1978 to 1987 with a brief 
break in service, and he received an honorable discharge. He has held a security 
clearance from about 2007 to 2017 and when he was in the Navy. There is no evidence 
of security violations. 
 
Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions from 2008 to November 2016 
while holding a security clearance.  His marijuana abuse “raises questions about [his] 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” See AG ¶ 24. He was 
arrested three times for DUI, and he continues to drink alcohol to intoxication about twice 
a week. “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses” and raises “questions about [his] reliability 
and trustworthiness.” See AG ¶ 21. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal 
conduct security concerns are mitigated. Drug involvement and alcohol consumption 
security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
 
13                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
