  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-07366 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant failed to present sufficient information to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 8, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to continue a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated May 16, 2016, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2016. He admitted with explanations the 
seven allegations of delinquent debt. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
  2 
 
July 19, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on December 2, 2016. DOD issued a 
notice of hearing on April 28, 2017, for a hearing on May 17, 2017. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. The Government’s four exhibits (GX 1-4), and Applicant’s five 
exhibits (AX A through E) were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant 
testified. I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 26, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is a 51-year-old high school graduate who has taken 
some college courses but has not received a degree. He served on active duty in the 
Navy as a cook from May 1985 until October 2005, when he retired and received an 
honorable discharge as a petty officer first class (E-6). He married in September 1996, 
but he and his wife have lived separately for eight years since March 2009. They have 
three grown children. Applicant works two full-time contractor positions as a systems 
engineer at two different government agencies. The salary for one position is $80,000 a 
year, and the other is $45,000 for approximately six months work. He also draws 
military retired pay of $1,709. His total monthly average net pay is approximately 
$7,600, with monthly expenses of approximately $5,600, leaving $2,000 in monthly 
discretionary funds. He has been eligible for access to classified information since 2005. 
He never had a security violation while being eligible for access to classified 
information. (Tr. 20-28, 98-103; GX 1, e-QIP, dated October 8, 2014; AX D, retired pay 
voucher, dated May 1, 2017) 
The SOR alleges the following seven delinquent debts: a charged-off credit card 
debt for $5,337 (SOR 1.a); a telephone bill in collection for $99 (SOR 1.b); a mortgage 
past due for $9,987 with a balance of $287,905 (SOR 1.c); another telephone service 
debt in collection for $1,096 (SOR 1.d); a medical debt in collection for $51 (SOR 1.e); 
delinquent federal income taxes for tax years 2008 to 2013 for $52,183.35 (SOR 1.f); 
delinquent state income taxes for tax years 2008, 2009, 2013, and 2014 for $4,272.86 
(SOR 1.g). The total amount of the delinquent debt is approximately $73,000. Applicant 
claims that most of his debts have been paid or resolved. (Tr. 16-17)  
Applicant claims he inquired about the debt at SOR 1.a, but he did not receive 
any information from the creditor. He believes the debt is a collection account that he 
                                            
1 I considered Applicant’s case under both the September 1, 2006 AGs, and the June 8, 2017 
AGs. My decision would be the same under both AGs. 
  3 
 
paid monthly and is resolved. He presented no information to reflect that the debt is paid 
or resolved.  
Applicant claims the telephone debt at SOR 1.b is not his debt but his son’s debt. 
However, he paid the debt himself to resolve the matter. He provided a credit card 
statement showing a debit for $107. Applicant did not provide any documentation linking 
this credit card transaction to the telephone bill. He did not provide any document to 
show the account has been paid, resolved, or is current. (Tr. 25-37. 103-108; AX E, 
Statement, dated March 20, 2017) 
The debt at SOR 1.c pertains to the mortgage on Applicant’s home. Applicant 
was unemployed for nine months from September 2013 to July 2014. He tried to pay 
the monthly mortgage of $1,828 using his retired pay and his unemployment 
compensation. He fell behind a few months. He was able to negotiate a payment plan 
with the mortgage company and was able to bring his mortgage current. In 2016, when 
Applicant and his wife separated, Applicant and one of his children continued to live in 
the house. For a few months, he negotiated with his wife to determine who would pay 
the mortgage. During this time, the mortgage payments were not timely paid, and the 
mortgage became a few months past due. Applicant now claims that he paid the 
mortgage and it is now current. Applicant agreed to furnish documents that show he is 
current with his mortgage. Applicant has not provided such documents. (Tr. 37-44)  
The debt at SOR 1.d is based on Applicant’s failure to return television cable 
equipment. Applicant claims he first learned of the debt in April 2015 when he was 
interviewed by a security investigator. He negotiated a payment plan with the telephone 
company and paid the debt. He claims that he provided a document to the security 
agent that interviewed him showing that the debt was paid or resolved. There is no 
record of the document being received by the government or in the case file. Applicant 
stated at the hearing that he could provide the document again after the hearing. 
Applicant did not provide any documents after the hearing to reflect that this debt has 
been paid or resolved. (Tr. 44-45) 
Applicant stated that the medical debt at SOR 1.e is for dental work. He also 
noted that he provided a receipt for the payment to the security investigator. He stated 
that he could provide a copy of the receipt after the hearing. There is no receipt in the 
case file and Applicant did not provide a receipt post hearing. (Tr. 45-48) 
Applicant does not have a reason for failing to timely file his federal tax returns 
for tax years 2008 to 2013, resulting in a federal income tax debt of $52,183.35 as 
noted in SOR 1.f. He had a tax professional prepare the tax return forms, but he just did 
not timely file them because he had crises happening in his life. His mother passed 
away, a year later his mother-in-law passed away, and he was in the process of 
separating from his wife. He filed all his past-due federal tax returns at one time in 
March 2013. He realized that the failure to file his tax returns hurt his ability to maintain 
a government job and resulted in unpaid back taxes of over $52,000.  
  4 
 
In March 2014, Applicant negotiated a payment plan with the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS). He paid $648 monthly until January 2016. He did not provide proof of an 
agreed plan with the IRS or receipts for any taxes paid under the agreement. At the 
time, he was working two separate jobs. He now claims that he is paying his federal 
taxes by a payment plan of $590.19 a month as of May 1, 2017. He did not provide any 
documents to verify that payment plan. Applicant also testified that he filed his 2014 and 
2015 tax returns but owes over $10,000 in back taxes for tax year 2015. (AX C, IRS 
Notice, dated May 8, 2017) He also notes he owes federal income taxes of over $5,000 
for tax year 2016. Based upon the hearing information provided by Applicant, his total 
federal income tax debt now is in excess of $80,000. (Tr. 48-76) 
Applicant admits he did not timely file his state income tax return for tax years 
2008, 2009, 2013, and 2014. He filed the required state tax returns in April 2014 and his 
state income tax debt was approximately $4,273 as reflected in SOR 1.g. Applicant 
claims that his state income taxes are current. However, the receipt he provided shows 
a payment of $900 on March 1, 2016, with current balance of $00.00. (AX A, Receipt, 
dated March 1, 2016) A later tax statement from the state reflects taxes owed of 
$3,123.49. (AX B, Statement, dated June 7, 2016) Based on the available evidence, I 
find that Applicant still owes over $3,000 in state income taxes. (Tr. 76-88) 
Applicant admits he recently purchased or helped to purchase three high-value 
cars in 2012, 2013, and 2015. He has large outstanding balances on the loans for these 
cars. He also admits to having three credit card with high balances for which he only 
makes the minimum payments. He also claims to be working from a household budget, 
but he failed to provide the budget after the hearing. (Tr. 88-98) 
I note that Applicant provided only limited information concerning his finances. 
His testimony at the hearing was contradictory and disjointed. He would correct his 
direct testimony when responding to questions from either Department Counsel or me. 
Applicant agreed at the hearing to produce documents to verify and corroborate his 
testimony. After the hearing, he did not provide the requested documents. (Tr. 88-98) 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
  5 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) The 
financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might 
knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security 
clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet his financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
  6 
 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
Credit reports (GX 2, dated October 12, 2014; GX 3, dated March 16, 2016) and 
a tax lien (GX 4, filed June 2, 2014) reveal, and Applicant admitted, that he has 
delinquent credit card, consumer, and tax debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income  
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local tax as required. 
 
The record shows that Applicant has delinquent debts and he did not pay is 
annual federal or state income taxes for a number of years. The information raises 
issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial obligations. Once 
the Government has established an adverse financial issue, the Applicant has the 
responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
  7 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. The debts are 
normal consumer, medical, and tax debts. Applicant had periods of unemployment. 
However in his response to the SOR, Applicant did not provide sufficient information to 
explain how these events led to the delinquent debts. In addition, Applicant claims to 
have made payments on and resolved some of the debts, or that he was making 
payment on the remaining debts. He claimed many of his debts were current. Applicant 
agreed at the hearing that he had documents to prove the status of the debts and he 
agreed to provide the documents after the hearing. He was advised that he needed to 
provide proof of his claims of payment or resolution of the debts. He has not 
documented his plans to resolve, payments, made, or the status of the debts. He did not 
provide information concerning financial counseling. Accordingly, he has not established 
a good-faith effort to pay his debts.  
 
Applicant has been gainfully employed at two jobs since at least July 2014. He 
seems to have the ability to resolve his delinquent debts. However, he has not acted 
responsibly, because he has not provided information on plans to pay his delinquent 
debts, or his payment of debts. There is no clear evidence that his debt problems have 
been resolved. His finances are not under control. Overall, he has not provided 
evidence or proof that he acted with reason and responsibility towards his finances. His 
lack of documented actions on his efforts to resolve his financial problems are a strong 
indication that he may not protect and safeguard classified information. In sum, 
Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  8 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s over 20 
years of honorable service in the Navy. Applicant did not present sufficient information 
to establish that he acted reasonably and responsibly towards his finances under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not establish a record of paying his debts and acting in a 
financially responsible manner. He did not establish that he acted with reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards his financial 
obligations. Applicant has not met his burden to establish his good-faith efforts to 
resolve his remaining debts.  
 
Applicant’s lack of reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is an 
indication that he will not protect and safeguard classified information. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security concerns arising 
under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
