 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08349 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that he is financially responsible 
and that his financial problems have been resolved or are under control. Moreover, he 
deliberately falsified his 2015 security clearance application (SCA) to cover up his 
financial problems. The financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns 
are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a SCA on May 7, 2015. After reviewing it and the information 
gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) on June 
13, 2016, issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant 
answered the SOR on June 27, 2016, submitted comments in extenuation and 
mitigation, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
July 28, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 9, 2016. He was allowed 30 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, 
 
2 
 
 
and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on June 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
October 1, 2015. (FORM, Item 4) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview and it would not be admitted or considered by me, or that he 
could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered by me. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I admitted the FORM with 
its proffered evidence, and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the seven financial factual allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.g). He denied that he deliberately falsified his 2015 SCA (SOR ¶ 2.a, the personal 
conduct allegation). His admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has never been 
married, but has an 11-year-old son. He graduated from high school in 1992. His 
employment history indicates that he has been fully employed since 2002. Between 
2013 and 2015, he held two full-time jobs. A federal contractor hired Applicant in May 
2015, and he submitted his first security clearance application. He has been working for 
his current employer since. 
 
In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his May 2015 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed no delinquent accounts or financial problems. A government background 
investigator interviewed Applicant in October 2015. During the interview, Applicant 
again denied having any delinquent accounts. The investigator confronted Applicant 
several times with the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant admitted to the investigator that SOR ¶ 1.a was his delinquent account 
resulting from a defaulted car loan. He was involved in a car accident without insurance, 
became delinquent on the car note, and the lender repossessed the vehicle. Applicant 
claimed he was waiting for the creditor to tell him what he owed after the vehicle was 
sold. He averred he did not disclose this delinquent debt in his 2015 SCA because he 
believed it was over seven years old. In his SOR answer, Applicant claimed he had 
recently contacted the creditor and established an agreement to pay $350 monthly.  
 
Concerning the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.d through 1.g, Applicant told 
the investigator that he did not recognize any of the creditors. These accounts are 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts as established by the credit report, and Applicant’s later 
SOR admissions. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant claimed in his SOR answer that he 
was in the process of paying the debt and “will be sending them” payment of $100 a 
month.  
 
Applicant explained that he broke a telephone contract and acquired the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c that became delinquent. He claimed he contacted the creditors of 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g, and established payment 
agreements starting in July 2016. Applicant also claimed he paid the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f.  
 
Applicant claimed he failed to disclose his delinquent debts in his 2015 SCA for 
several reasons: (1) because he didn’t realized he owed the money, (2) he believed the 
debts were over seven years old and outside of the scope of the SCA questions, and (3) 
he believed he had paid some accounts. Applicant submitted no documentary evidence 
to establish his claims of entering into payment agreements, making any payments, or 
having paid any debt.  
 
Applicant noted that he should have been more responsible in his efforts to pay 
the debts. He explained that he was now in the process of taking care of these debts 
and took responsibility for his mistakes. As of his May 2015 interview, Applicant had not 
participated in financial counseling. He claimed he was living within his financial means, 
and believed he was capable of meeting his financial obligations. Applicant presented 
no evidence of any efforts to contact his creditors or to otherwise resolve his delinquent 
accounts since he acquired the debts.  
 
Applicant presented no evidence about his current financial situation, including 
his income, outstanding debts, whether his income is sufficient to pay for his living 
expenses, and whether his financial problems are resolved or under control. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
The case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
4 
 
 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
 
5 
 
 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. AG ¶ 19 
provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; ”(b) unwillingness to satisfy 
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing, recent, and he acquired the debts under normal circumstances 
that are likely to recur. Applicant submitted no evidence to show that his financial 
problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control. He presented no evidence of 
a good-faith effort to pay his debts or a reasonable basis to dispute them. There is no 
evidence he participated in financial counseling or that he is following a budget. There is 
no evidence of Applicant’s current financial situation, including his income, and whether 
his income is sufficient to pay for his living expenses and debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2015 SCA when he 
failed to disclose that he had financial problems that included at least seven delinquent 
accounts. Applicant’s omissions, if deliberate, would trigger the applicability the 
following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. (ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)). Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 
age, education, work experience, his 2015 statement to a government investigator, and 
his SOR answer, I find that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate or made with the 
intent to mislead the Government. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable. Additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
8 
 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s evidence is 
insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. Applicant’s claims of lack of 
knowledge or honest mistake (by believing that the debts were over seven years old 
and not required to be disclosed), are not supported by the record. The 2015 credit 
report in evidence (FORM, Item 5) shows most of the alleged delinquent debts were 
delinquent within the preceding seven years. Furthermore, when Applicant completed 
his 2015 SCA, he was over 120 days delinquent on those debts and was required to 
disclose them. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 45, has been employed with a federal contractor since May 2015. He 
failed to demonstrate that his financial problems have been resolved or are under 
control. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Moreover, he 
deliberately falsified his 2015 SCA to cover his financial problems.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
