 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 15-02866 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
August 7, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 18, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On November 24, 2015, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.1  
 
                                            
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 22, 2015, and requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2) On April 14, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 7, was provided to 
Applicant, who received the FORM on April 21, 2016.2  
 
Included in the FORM was a proposed “Amendment to the SOR” concerning 
allegations 1.b and 1.c. Applicant accepted the proposed amendments and admitted the 
underlying allegations. The amended allegations 1.b and 1.c, as set forth in the FORM, 
are hereby substituted for the original allegations in the SOR by reference. 
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted additional 
information. Department Counsel had no objection and the documentation is admitted 
into evidence as Applicant Exhibit A. The case was assigned to me on December 13, 
2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 53 and separated. He is employed by a defense contractor and 
seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment. 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant 
denied allegations 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. As stated, he admitted the amended allegations 
1.b and 1.c. Applicant also submitted additional information to support his request for 
national security eligibility.  
 
 1.a. Applicant denied that he was indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
for unpaid taxes for tax years, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012 in the approximate amount 
of $2,536. Applicant stated in Item 2 at page 4, “I do not owe any back taxes to the IRS. 
All back taxes were paid in full in May 2015.” Applicant stated that he owed back taxes 
because of periods of unemployment, paying child support for his children, and having 
                                            
2 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 4 is inadmissible. It 
will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on October 7, 2014. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
to pay his daily expenses. Applicant submitted a document from the IRS dated 
December 15, 2015, confirming the fact that he no longer owed any taxes for those tax 
years. (Applicant Exhibit A at 4.) This debt is resolved.  
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that he had failed to file his 2012 tax return in State A as 
required. He stated that this was due to oversight because he had to move several 
times for work within a short period of time due to the BRAC. (Item 3 at Section 26; 
Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) Applicant has since filed the applicable tax return, and 
submitted a “Letter of Good Standing for [State A] Personal Income Tax Returns.” The 
letter confirms that Applicant’s account with State A is current. This allegation is 
resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 5.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he had failed to file his 2011 tax return in State B as 
required. He stated that this was due to oversight because he had to move several 
times for work within a short period of time due to the BRAC. (Item 3 at Section 26; 
Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) Applicant has since filed the applicable tax return, and 
submitted a letter from State B dated December 28, 2015. The letter confirms that 
Applicant has “no outstanding bill and your account has a zero balance at this time.” 
This allegation is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 6.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant denied owing a creditor for a past-due debt in the amount of $32. 
Applicant stated, “This had been a medical bill for one of my kids that my ex-wife did not 
pay or inform me about it. Once I was aware of this, I paid the bill.” Applicant submitted 
his credit report, dated December 21, 2015, which shows this debt as being “closed.” 
(Applicant Exhibit A at 1; Item 2 at 7.) This allegation is resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant denied owing a creditor for a past-due debt in the amount of $13. 
Applicant stated that this was also a medical bill for one of his children that his ex-wife 
did not resolve. Applicant stated that he had also paid this bill, and the same credit 
report confirms it as being “closed.” (Applicant Exhibit A at 1; Item 2 at 7.) This 
allegation is resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant denied owing a judgment for a past-due medical debt in the amount 
of $1,145. He stated that this judgment was also related to a medical bill for one of his 
children. He submitted documentation from the court showing the judgment was 
satisfied on December 18, 2015. (Item 2 at 4-6; Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) This allegation 
is resolved. 
 
 Applicant states that his current financial condition is stable. “There is nothing 
derogatory in all three credit reports and I have paid all my bills on time.” The complete 
credit report in the record, dated March 6, 2016, confirms that statement with the 
exception of the debts discussed here. (Item 6; Applicant Exhibit A at 2.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant submitted two letters of recommendation from people who have known 
him in the workplace for eight to ten years. Each of the writers describe him as a man of 
“good moral character.” (Applicant Exhibit A at 7-8.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“Any determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, three conditions apply to the facts found 
in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he formerly owed Federal back taxes for several years, 
and that he had failed to file 2011 and 2012 state tax returns in his states of residence. 
In addition, there were several past-due debts that appeared on his credit report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains seven conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Four of them have applicability to the facts of 
this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant submitted evidence that he has paid all of his past-due taxes, and filed 
the subject state tax returns. In addition, he submitted evidence that the three medical 
debts alleged in the SOR, which total less than $1,200, have been resolved. All four of 
the mitigating conditions apply to this case. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns regarding his financial situation. Overall, the record evidence does not create 
substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present suitability for national security eligibility, and 
a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
