 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 15-08174 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on January 30, 2015. On June 13, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 11, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. On August 31, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case and sent a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 5. She was 
                                                          
1 ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“The Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
 
2 
 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on September 9, 2016, 
and timely submitted her response, to which the Government did not object. I marked 
the documents comprising her FORM response as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through D. 
Item 1 contains the pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 5 and AX A through D are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 30, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.2 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.3 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. 
Having considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have 
been the same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. She has no children, and divorced her husband of 11 
years in 1995. She received her high school diploma in 1978. Since 2005, she has been 
employed by a federal healthcare provider, having been promoted twice; from a 
customer service representative (CSR) II to III in 2009 and from CSR III to a provider 
relations outreach specialist in 2014. She was granted a confidential clearance in 1998, 
and has held a position of trust since 2006. 
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling $51,091, including two federal 
tax liens totaling $21,204 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e), and five accounts in collection status. 
The collection accounts include a $28,581 federal student loan (SOR ¶ 1.a), two 
wireless bills totaling $637 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c), a $575 payday loan (SOR ¶ 1.f), and 
a $94 medical bill (SOR ¶ 1.g). In her SOR answer, Applicant denied, without 
explanation, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d. Her admitted debts total 
$40,586. The credit reports establish each of the denied debts.5 Applicant provided a 
                                                          
2 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
3 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
4 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 1), her SCA (Item 2), and the summaries of her June 2015 and September 
2015 subject interviews (Item 3). I considered that Item 3 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20. However, Applicant was informed by Department Counsel that she was entitled to make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and updates to Item 3. She was also informed that she was entitled to 
object to consideration of Item 3 on the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant did neither in her 
response to the FORM. 
 
5 Items 4 and 5. 
 
 
3 
 
copy of the tax lien which also establishes the debt alleged in SOR 1.d.6 Applicant 
attributed her delinquent debts to “financial hardship” caused by “not having enough 
money coming in to pay her debts,” without providing any more specific details.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file her federal tax returns for tax years 2006 through 
2011 because she did not have funds available to pay the amounts owed.7 After her 
bank account was garnished in about 2010 or 2011, she contacted the IRS to explain 
her financial hardship. The IRS placed her account in hardship status and advised that 
her tax refunds would be withheld from that point forward until her debt was paid in full. 
In November 2012, the IRS filed a $9,869 lien for tax years 2006, 2009, and 2010 (SOR 
¶ 1.d), and another in June 2013 for tax years 2007, 2008, and 2011 in the amount of 
$11,336 (SOR ¶ 1.e).8 As of June 2015, her last contact with the IRS had been 
November or December 2014.9 In September 2016, Applicant initiated paperwork to 
establish an installment agreement for tax years 2006 through 2011. The installment 
agreement was established in October 2016 with a monthly payment of $120 and a total 
balance of $23,653.10 In October 2016, she timely made her first IRS installment 
payment and also paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g.11  
 
 Although it was not alleged in the SOR, Applicant answered “no” to each 
financial-related question on her SCA, thereby failing to disclose any of the SOR debts 
that she knew about at the time that she completed it.12 During her June 2015 
background-investigation interview, she claimed she did so because she did not have 
access to the internet and was unable to obtain a credit report. She voluntarily reported 
her known debts during that interview, which included the federal student loan debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.) and one of the federal tax liens (SOR ¶ 1.e). She also promised to 
research her unknown debts and resolve them if deemed responsible.13  
 
In June 2015, she described her financial situation as “living paycheck to 
paycheck.” She planned to move in with her parents in November 2015 so that she 
could use the unspecified amount she paid in rent towards resolving her debt.14 
                                                          
6 AX B; GE 3 at p. 4. 
 
7 Because the Government did not specifically allege her failure to file in the SOR, I will consider it only to 
evaluate mitigation and whole person. The record does not address whether and when she filed those 
returns. However, in light of the record as a whole, I assume that they have been filed. My decision would 
be the same whether they have been filed or not. 
8 AX B; GE 3 at p. 4.  
 
9 Item 3 at p. 4. 
 
10 While the record does not indicate what, if any, tax refunds were withheld, this balance suggests that 
there was little to nothing withheld. 
 
11 AX A, C, and D. 
 
12 I will consider this only to evaluate mitigation and whole person. 
 
13 Item 3 at p. 4-5. 
 
14 Item 3 at p. 5-6. 
 
4 
 
However, as reported on her August 2016 budget worksheet, she was paying monthly 
rent of $860. She had a negative monthly net remainder of over $2,000 and was making 
bi-weekly payments for two unspecified loans totaling $315.15 There were no payments 
referenced on that budget to the creditors alleged in the SOR. The record is otherwise 
silent as to specific details about her relevant income and expense history and any 
particulars concerning the financial impact that her past or present circumstances have 
had on her ability to pay her delinquent debt. The record is also silent as to whether 
Applicant has sought out or received any credit counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.16  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in the AG.17 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the 
guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government establishes a 
disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to establish their eligibility for a public trust position.18 The protection of the 
national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15 See attachment to SOR Answer. 
 
16 Directive, § 3.2.  
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 2.  
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15. 
 
 
5 
 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s financial indebtedness and her failure to timely pay her federal 
income taxes establish three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and 
AG ¶ 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts remain 
unresolved, including substantial federal debt owed for taxes and student loans. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant did not meet her burden to establish that 
her financial hardship was largely beyond her control. However, even if it was so 
deemed, she has not met her burden to establish that she acted responsibly to address 
the resulting debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant is credited with establishing 
an installment agreement to address her tax debt, with timely paying the first 
installment, and with paying two other SOR debts; albeit after she received the SOR. 
However, she has not initiated any action to resolve her student loan debt or the two 
wireless account debts. I cannot conclude that her financial problems are under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (e) is not established. Applicant did not articulate a basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the wireless account debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. She also did not 
provide any evidence of action taken to resolve the issue.  
 
AG ¶ 20(g) is not established. Applicant did not initiate contact with the IRS to 
notify them of her financial hardship until after they garnished her bank account. She did 
not contact them again to resolve the debt until after she received the SOR. Moreover, 
Applicant provided proof of only one installment payment to the IRS and her monthly 
budget shortfall suggests that she may have trouble making those payments.  
 
 
7 
 
Whether or not Applicant could afford to pay her taxes, she was required to 
timely file her tax returns. Absent a compelling excuse or reason, Applicant’s failure to 
timely file her tax returns and pay her tax debt reveals a deficiency in the judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness required of persons handling sensitive information. A 
person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing income tax 
returns when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of those granted access to sensitive information.19 “Failure to file 
income tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-
established government rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and 
systems is essential for protecting classified information.”20  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her financial indebtedness, or by her failure to timely file income tax 
returns and pay income taxes. I am also troubled by Applicant’s failure to report either 
her failure to timely file tax returns and pay taxes, or the student loan debt, which she 
knew about at the time she completed the SCA. Answering “yes” instead of “no” to the 
applicable questions would not have required access to the internet or a credit report. 
Especially because this was not her first SCA, her failure to report these issues further 
calls into question her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Accordingly, 
Applicant has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant her eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
                                                          
19 See, e.g.,ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
