 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08636 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented insufficient information to establish that he is financially 
responsible and that his financial problems have been resolved or are under control. 
The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 12, 2015. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on April 8, 2016, issued him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant 
answered the SOR on May 16, 2016, submitted documents, and requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
September 12, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on September 20, 2016. He was 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant timely responded to the FORM and 
submitted 11 pages (marked and admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1) addressing 
 
2 
 
 
some of the accounts alleged in the SOR. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 
2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
her unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator 
from September 2, 2015. (FORM, Item 4) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview and it would not be admitted or considered by me, or that he 
could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered by me. Applicant responded to the FORM and raised no objections. I 
admitted the FORM with its proffered evidence, and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the three SOR factual allegations and submitted some 
documents in extenuation and mitigation. His admissions to the SOR allegations and in 
his response to the FORM are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a large federal contractor. He married his 
wife in June 2007, and they have four children, ages nine, seven, five and four. 
Applicant received an associate’s degree in 2006. A federal contractor hired Applicant in 
August 2015, and he submitted his first security clearance application.  
 
Applicant’s employment history indicates that he was unemployed while 
attending college between August 2003 and July 2006; employed between August 2006 
and January 2008; self-employed between November 2007 and November 2010; 
unemployed between November 2010 and October 2013; employed from October 2013 
to July 2015 on a non-paying job (he worked for lodging accommodations); and he has 
been working for his current employer since August 2015. 
 
Applicant is delinquent on two student loans that are in collection, totaling over 
$23,500 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), and he owes a bank over $4,569 for a charged-off credit 
card account. (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
 
Applicant opened the credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c in 2004. He 
presented no evidence of any payments, payment arrangements, efforts to contact the 
creditor, or to otherwise resolve this account since he acquired the debt. During his 
September 2015 interview with a government investigator and in his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant stated he had wished to pay off the debt, but learned that the account 
would age out of his credit report by March 2016. He chose to wait for the passing of the 
statute of limitations instead of paying his debt. Applicant stated that his wife and 
 
3 
 
 
children are wholly dependent on him financially, and he saw no reason to reinstate the 
account because it would jeopardize his financial security. (FORM, Item 4; Answer) 
 
Applicant blames himself for his financial problems. He explained that he caused 
himself a financial crisis when he quit his job to start his own company in 2007. His 
business failed in 2010. He claimed he was unable to find employment until October 
2013. Applicant also averred he did not live beyond his means. Between April and 
November 2010, he lived with his parents. Between December 2010 and October 2013, 
Applicant lived in another country. He stated that during the later period he worked as a 
watchman securing construction equipment in exchange for a room but earned no 
money. In his August 2015 SCA, Applicant stated that he had not “worked for cash for 
more than five years.” (FORM, Item 3) 
 
Applicant’s student loans have been delinquent at least since 2006. Following his 
2015 interview, Applicant entered into a student-loan-rehabilitation agreement with his 
state. In September 2015, he agreed to make $5 monthly payments to rehabilitate his 
two student loans. With his May 2016 SOR answer, Applicant submitted documentary 
evidence showing he made eight $5 payments, the last one in May 2016. 
 
In his October 2016 FORM response, Applicant submitted a pay and earnings 
statement showing his hourly-pay rate is $13.86. He has approximately $1,566 in an 
employer sponsored retirement account. His 2015 W-2 Form (Wage and Tax 
Statement) shows $7,180 in earnings for that year. He also submitted W-2 Forms for tax 
year 2006 showing earnings of $5,899; for tax year 2007 showing earnings of $21,575; 
and for tax year 2008 showing earnings of $1,002. He presented no evidence to show 
he has received credit counseling or that he follows a budget. The 2016 credit report on 
file shows Applicant took out a $6,420 car loan in 2016, and opened a credit card 
account in 2015 with a $254 balance as of August 2016. (FORM, Item 6) 
 
Applicant presented little evidence about his current financial situation. It is not 
clear what financial support he has provided for his wife and four children, or whether 
his income is sufficient to pay for his family’s living expenses and debts. 
 
Applicant received an employee of the month award in February 2016. The 
award indicates Applicant is considered to be a key team member who is professional 
and dedicated. His supervisors commended his honesty and excellent work ethic. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
The case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. 
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the file record. AG ¶ 19 
provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and recent. His evidence is insufficient to show that his financial 
problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant’s periods of underemployment, unemployment, and his failed business 
likely contributed to or aggravated his financial situation. However, Applicant’s scant 
evidence is insufficient to establish that he was financially responsible under the 
circumstances. His student loans date from at least 2006. He presented no evidence of 
payments made before his September 2016 interview, or of any efforts to contact his 
creditors to resolve his financial problems.  
 
 Applicant is commended for his recent student-loan-payment agreement and the 
payments he has made so far. However, considering the period during which the loans 
were delinquent, the value of the payments being made, and that the agreement was 
established after confrontation, I cannot consider his actions as good-faith efforts to 
resolve the loan debts. Moreover, Applicant made no effort to pay or resolve the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He elected to let the statute of limitations pass and indicated he 
does not intend to pay that debt. 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to explain the reasons for his periods of 
unemployment, why he lived in another country for several years, where was his family 
during those periods, and how he supported himself and his family during the periods of 
unemployment and while living in another country. The record is not clear about 
Applicant’s current financial situation, and whether his income is sufficient to pay for his 
family’s living expenses and current debts. The evidence fails to show whether 
Applicant’s financial problems are resolved or under control. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has established a 
reputation for his professionalism, dedication, and work ethic. Applicant is considered to 
be honest and a valuable employee.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant presented insufficient information to establish that he 
is financially responsible and that his financial problems have been resolved or are 
under control. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
