 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-08833 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
On July 30, 2016, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and he elected to 
have his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
it was received on September 11, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government's evidence, which are 
identified as Items 1 through 4. Applicant did not submit any documents or additional 
information. The Government’s documents are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on August 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.h. He denied the 
allegation in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j. His admissions are incorporated into 
the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is a college graduate. He married in 2001 and has 
four children, ages 13, 10, 8, and 6 years old. He has worked for his present employer, 
as a subcontractor, since October 2014.2  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant has ten delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$37,600 that are charged off, past-due or in collection status. He attributed his financial 
problems to traveling frequently; having four children in school with extra-curricular 
activities; and car repairs. He stated in answer to the SOR that in 2011 his father 
became sick and Applicant took time off from work to help. He said he lost his job in 
June 2011 because of his absences from work. He received unemployment benefits 
and did not find employment until October 2011. 
 
 In his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed that he worked 
for the same employer from May 2009 to July 2012, when he was terminated due to 
unsatisfactory attendance. He also disclosed on SCA that he was also unemployed 
from March to April 2013 and December 2012 to January 2013.3 
 
 Applicant stated in his SOR answer that after he began working in October 2011, 
he enrolled in a debt reduction/elimination program in December 2011. He said through 
this program he has been diligently negotiating with his creditors to repay delinquent 
debts. He stated he was 90 days from completing the program. He is no longer using 
credit cards.4  
 
 As part of his answer, Applicant provided a document, presumably from his bank 
that shows from January 2014 through May 2016, a recurring transaction occurred in 
                                                          
2 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 1. 
 
3 
the amount of $650. It does identify the creditor or nature of the transaction. He also 
provided a list of “paid settlements.” This list was unsubstantiated and could not be 
verified against the debts alleged in the SOR. No documents from creditors or other 
reliable sources were provided to show the debts were paid, settled, or resolved.5 
 
 In October 2015, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator, and he 
disclosed that he received financial counseling and was enrolled in a debt reduction 
program since September 2012 and he was paying $695 a month. He provided a list of 
accounts that were in the program, including the accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 
and 1.j. He told the investigator that he was unfamiliar with the account in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
He disclosed on his SCA and admitted in his SOR answer the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h 
($6,257). It is not part of the debt reduction plan. He also acknowledged to the 
investigator that he owed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($262) and 1.c ($410), but had not 
made arrangements to pay them. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($2,528) debt was not 
addressed during the interview.6  
 
 In the Government’s FORM, written in bold, it stated: “At this juncture, Applicant 
has not provided written documentation that sufficiently shows payment toward the 
debts specified in the SOR.” Applicant did not provide documentation of the debt 
reduction plan; the date of its inception; proof of consistent payments from 2011 or 2012 
as he stated; or proof any of the SOR debts are paid, settled, or resolved. A March 2015 
credit report lists the debts alleged in the SOR.7  
 
Policies 
 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 1. 
 
6 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
7 FORM at page 2, Item 4. 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 
5 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2011 that he is unable 
or unwilling to pay. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he has been addressing some of 
the debts alleged in the SOR. He did not submit evidence documenting payments or 
resolution of those debts since 2011. He did not provide information about the other 
debts in the SOR. Applicant’s debts are unresolved and his financial issues are 
ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems in 2011 to traveling; having four 
children; car repairs; and loss of employment when he was terminated due to absences 
from work. He stated he took time off from work to care for his father who was ill. While 
traveling, children, and car repairs may have been circumstances beyond his control, 
his termination from employment was within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant stated 
he has been working with a debt reduction company since 2011 or 2012 and has been 
 
6 
negotiating settlements for his delinquent debts. However, he did not provide 
documentary evidence to verify his statement. In addition, not all of his debts were 
included in the payment plan he established. He did not provide any information about 
those debts that were not included in the plan. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant stated he received financial counseling and was addressing some of 
his delinquent debts through a debt reduction plan; however, he failed to provide proof 
of that plan or payments made into it. I have insufficient reliable evidence to conclude 
any of the alleged debts are paid or resolved, or that his financial problems are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶¶ 20(d) 
or 20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old college educated person. He experienced financial 
problems in 2011. He indicated he has been participating in a debt reduction plan since 
then, but failed to provide substantive documentary evidence to verify his statements. 
Applicant’s conduct raises questions and doubts about his eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
