 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06690 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
August 3, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline G.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 27, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 14, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 1, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 and 2, which were 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. 
Applicant presented eight documents, which were marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) 
A through H and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on December 13, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations in SOR, with explanations. (TR at page 
38 lines 20~25.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since September of 2014. (GX 1 at 
page 10.) He is retired from the U.S. Navy, and held a security clearance until his 
retirement in 2010. (GX at pages 12~15 and 34.) He has been married to a U.S. citizen 
for over 30 years. (GX 1 at pages 18~19, see also TR at page 20 line 7 to page 22 line 
22.) 
  
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption  
 
 1.d.2 In November of 1987, while on a break in service from the Navy, Applicant 
was charged with, and subsequently pled guilty to, Driving Under the Influence (DUI). 
(TR at page 23 line 9 to page 24 line 13, at page 42 lines 19~25, and at page 43 line 19 
to page 44 line 21.) As a result of this conviction, his driver’s license was suspended; 
and in order to get his license reinstated, Applicant completed a “two or three-day 
classroom-type” alcohol awareness course. (TR at page 43 line 19 to page 44 line 21.) 
 
 1.c. From May of 1996 to June of 1996, Applicant attended a 28-day in-patient 
alcohol treatment program. (TR at page 24 line 14 to page 27 line 4.) He was diagnosed 
as suffering from Alcohol Dependency. (Id.) As the result of this diagnosis, Applicant 
stopped consuming alcohol for “about nine years.” (TR at page 25 line 13 to page 26 
line 4.) However, in 2005, he started to again consume alcohol. (TR at page 26 line 5 to 
page27 line 24.) 
 
 1.b. In December of 2009, Applicant self-referred to a Substance Abuse and 
Rehabilitation Program. (TR at page 27 line 25 to page 28 line 9.) He was again 
diagnosed as suffering from Alcohol Dependency, and advised to attend four Alcoholics 
Anonymous meetings each week. (TR at page 28 lines 10~17.) He attended about “a 
dozen” meetings over a period of about three weeks, but did not find the meetings 
effective. (TR at page 28 line 18 to page 29 line 19.)  After about a year of sobriety, 
Applicant began again to consume alcohol. (TR at page 29 line 24 to page 30 line 13.) 
From 2011~2014, Applicant describes his consumption of alcohol in the following terms: 
“I was drinking pretty steadily. Three to five times a week, and sometimes we’d get 
drunk and sometimes we’d just drink without getting too drunk . . .” (TR at page 30 lines 
14~20.) 
                                                          
2 The allegations will be discussed in chronological order. 
 
3 
 
 1.a. In November of 2013, Applicant retired from the Navy. (GX 1 at pages 
15~16.) He had difficulties transitioning to civilian life. (TR at page 30 line 25 to page 31 
line 18.) This, coupled with some family issues, led Applicant to seek counseling at a 
mental health clinic to address his perceived depression. (Id.) In February of 2014, he 
was diagnosed, a third time, in part, as suffering from Alcohol Dependency. (TR at page 
31 line 19 to page 32 line 16.) He has not consumed alcohol since January of 2014, 
more than three years ago, and participates in a program called “Rational Recovery.” 
(TR at page 32 line 17 to page 34 line 22.) 
 
  In January of 2015, Applicant was diagnosed, in part, with “Alcohol Induced 
Depressive Disorder – resolved,” and with “Alcohol Use Disorder, severe, in remission.” 
(TR at page 35 lines 4~19, and AppX B at page 5.) In July of 2016, Applicant signed a 
Statement of Intent, averring, in part, an “intent to never abuse alcohol again.” (AppX 
C.) He further testified that the terms “never ‘abuse alcohol again’”. . . “means to never 
use.” (TR at page 46 lines 14~21.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO)10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be 
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Five conditions may apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant has a 1987  DUI, and has been diagnosed as being Alcohol Dependent 
in 1996, 2010, and 2014. In 2015, that dependency was found to be in remission.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 While Applicant’s Alcohol Dependency may currently be in remission, I cannot 
overlook the fact that he returned to the consumption of alcohol after unfavorable 
diagnoses 1996 and 2010. It is too soon to say that he will not return to its consumption 
again. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a laudatory history of now working in the defense industry, and is 
respected by those who know him in the work place. (AppX F.) He performs well at his 
job. (AppXs E and H.)   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Alcohol Consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
