 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08527 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mathew R. Keller, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a felon who took advantage of his position of trust to commit a crime 
against the Government. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s 
criminal behavior continues to cast serious doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 20, 2015. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on March 21, 2016, issued him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and E (personal 
conduct). Applicant answered the SOR on April 15, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA).  
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 15, 2016, scheduling a hearing 
for January 11, 2017. DOHA initially assigned the case to another administrative judge 
and reassigned it to me on January 9, 2017. At the hearing, the Government offered five 
exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, 
 
2 
 
 
and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 11. All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a. He admitted in part, and 
denied in part, the allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a., and he denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 
2.b. His admissions to the SOR and at his hearing are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, including his testimony and 
demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 71-year-old owner of a company (working as key management 
personnel for his company) that handles or seeks federal contracts. He distinguished 
himself academically in high school, was involved in his community, and became an 
Eagle Scout. He received his bachelor’s degree in 1967 and completed his master’s 
degree in 1968, both from a prestigious U.S. institution. While at the institution, he 
received two academic scholarship awards and a leadership award. After five years 
working for a private company, Applicant received national recognition with two awards 
for innovative product development. He has been married and divorced twice, his last 
divorce was in 1999. He has three grown children, ages 37, 34, and 30. 
 
Around 1973, Applicant became the vice-president of an engineering company 
where he spent close to 30 years and received an award for environmental innovation. 
Applicant possessed a secret clearance for about 26 years until it was revoked in 2009 
because of the offenses alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he is a convicted felon. The criminal conduct 
alleged in the SOR occurred between June 2001 and December 2002, while he was 
president, chairman, and chief executive officer of his company. Applicant pled guilty to 
one count of participating in a conspiracy to suppress and eliminate competition by 
allocating customers, rigging bids, and fixing prices that resulted in government 
contracts being awarded at inflated prices. He orchestrated and supervised the criminal 
conspiracy. Because of his criminal conspiracy, his company increased its profits and 
he was able to sell about 75% of his company for about $13.5 million. Apparently, his 
criminal misconduct ended in December 2002, when he sold a portion of his company. 
 
In May 2005, an individual brought a civil lawsuit against Applicant, his company, 
and approximately 60 other defendants. It alleged the conspiracy described above. 
Applicant was added as a defendant in the lawsuit in June 2006. Because the lawsuit 
was filed under seal, Applicant was not notified of the existence of the civil lawsuit or of 
the ensuing criminal charges against him until May 2009. At the time Applicant 
submitted his 2007 SCA, he was not aware of either the lawsuit or the criminal charges 
against him. (Answer to the SOR, Exhibits A-D; Tr. 14-15) 
 
In June 2009, Applicant pled guilty to one count of violation of the Sherman Act 
(conspiracy to suppress or eliminate competition, a felony), and cooperated with the 
 
3 
 
 
government. He was sentenced to 18 months of imprisonment at age 64, with one year 
of supervised release, and was fined $100,000. He served his prison sentence from 
November 2009 to January 2011. He settled the civil lawsuit and paid a settlement of 
$1,000,000.  
 
Applicant claimed he took criminal responsibility for his company and the persons 
he supervised who engaged in the criminal conspiracy because he was the owner of the 
company and the individuals worked directly for him. (Tr. 43) Applicant minimized his 
involvement in the conspiracy by claiming he merely oversaw the operations of two of 
the companies involved in the crime, that he just failed to supervise his subordinates, 
and that he did not have direct involvement in the conspiracy. The federal criminal court 
documents in evidence prove otherwise. (GE 2-5) The federal government debarred 
Applicant for a period of three years. 
 
Applicant strongly believes that he is fully rehabilitated. He noted his criminal 
behavior ended in 2002, about 15 years ago. He claimed that since 2002 he has been a 
law-abiding citizen. There is no evidence he has committed any other misconduct or 
criminal offenses since 2002. He cooperated with the government during his criminal 
prosecution, and paid some restitution in both the criminal and civil cases. He believes 
that his past criminal behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Applicant testified it is unlikely he would be involved in bid rigging or price fixing 
in the future because his company is a sole source supplier to the government. There 
are no competitors and prices are negotiated. He also stated that going to prison made 
him not want to do anything illegal again. He does volunteer work for a national park 
and is involved in his community.  
 
Applicant’s company continued to do business with the federal government while 
he was in prison and during the period of his debarment. He wants a clearance to 
continue working in his company. He believes he has a lot to give to his business with 
his 40 years of work and technical expertise.  
 
Applicant’s references included the executive director of a large charitable 
foundation, the director of a large national contractor, the chief executive officer of a 
well-known publishing company, an established business owner, the chairman of a 
health services company, and others who have known Applicant for many years. Some 
of his references have known Applicant for over 20 years. Some references recommend 
him for a security clearance.1 
 
Applicant was described as invariably honest, completely trustworthy, and as a 
man of principle and of high integrity. His references and friends assess him as loyal, 
conscientious, and responsible. He has an excellent reputation as an extremely hard-
                                            
1 Answer to the SOR; Tr. 70-78; and AE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
working and accomplished businessman and a dedicated father. Applicant’s references 
consider him a successful entrepreneur and business leader with unique skills. I note; 
however, that some of his references are not fully aware of the criminal conduct for 
which he was convicted. They are under the misconception that Applicant was not 
involved in criminal behavior, or believe that the criminal behavior was not due to 
Applicant’s fault.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. I decided this case under the AGs 
implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
 
5 
 
 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 Between June 2001 and December 2002, Applicant was president, chairman, 
and chief executive officer of his own company. He orchestrated, managed, and 
supervised a criminal conspiracy to suppress and eliminate competition by allocating 
customers, rigging bids, and fixing prices for government contracts. Because of this 
criminal conspiracy, his company increased its profits and he was able to sell 75% of his 
company for about $13.5 million. He owned 56% of the company. 
 
In June 2009, Applicant was found guilty of one count of violation of the Sherman 
Act (conspiracy to suppress or eliminate competition, a felony). He cooperated with the 
prosecution and was sentenced to 18 months of imprisonment at age 64, with one year 
of supervised release, and was fined $100,000. He served his prison sentence from 
November 2009 to January 2011.  
 
 His criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(b) “evidence 
(including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and matters of official 
record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, 
prosecuted, or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) apply in part, but do not fully mitigate the criminal conduct 
security concerns. Applicant’s criminal behavior occurred between 2001 and 2002, 
about 15 years ago, and he was convicted of a felony offense by a federal court in 
2009. Applicant served his sentence to 18 months of imprisonment with one year of 
supervised release, and paid his $100,000 fine. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence showing that he is on the right track to 
establish his successful rehabilitation. He pleaded guilty (the first step towards 
rehabilitation) and cooperated with the federal prosecutor. There is no evidence of any 
further criminal misconduct after 2002. Additionally, Applicant paid a $1 million 
settlement in a civil lawsuit based on the same criminal misconduct. He noted that he 
has been involved in constructive community involvement, and volunteers at a national 
park. Applicant’s references consider him to be dependable, reliable, trustworthy, 
honest, and to display good judgment. Some endorse his eligibility for a clearance. 
 
 Notwithstanding, the factors in support of the denial of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial. Applicant had distinguished himself through his education, scientific 
accomplishments, awards received, his success as an entrepreneur and businessman, 
and his membership and leadership in prestigious business organizations. By all 
accounts, he was a pillar of the business community at the national level. He was 56-57 
years old when he engaged in the criminal conspiracy. Considering his age, education, 
experience, knowledge, and his reputation, he knew better and was fully aware of the 
criminality of his actions. 
 
 Applicant held a clearance for approximately 26 years before he engaged in his 
criminal conspiracy. The government granted Applicant his clearance and with it placed 
a special trust and confidence on Applicant. It relied on Applicant and expected him to 
demonstrate his trustworthiness, character, honesty, and good judgment - to exercise 
the responsibility necessary to protect that trust. Applicant’s criminal behavior destroyed 
that trust. Applicant took advantage of his position to break the law because of his greed 
and avarice. His criminal behavior showed unreliability, untrustworthiness, and lack of 
judgment.  
 
 Considering the extent and breath of the criminal conspiracy, that the 
government was the primary victim, and Applicant’s earnings resulting from his criminal 
behavior, I find that the passage of time so far is insufficient for Applicant to establish 
his successful rehabilitation. I specifically considered that it has been 15 years since 
Applicant’s criminal misconduct and that there is no evidence of any additional criminal 
activity.  
 
7 
 
 
 Notwithstanding, at hearing Applicant minimized the extent of his criminal 
conduct and blamed subordinates. He portrayed himself as sacrificing himself by taking 
the criminal blame because his company could not go to jail, and because he failed to 
perform his duty to supervise his employees. Considering the information contained in 
the extracts of his criminal proceedings, Applicant’s efforts to minimize his involvement 
in the criminal conspiracy he orchestrated are not credible. Moreover, his lack of 
credibility and his unwillingness to accept responsibility for his past criminal misconduct 
continue to raise serious questions and doubts about his rehabilitation. Applicant’s 
evidence is insufficient to establish his successful rehabilitation, and more importantly, 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . .   
 
The Guideline E allegation is based substantially on the same facts and criminal 
misconduct discussed under Guideline J. For the sake of brevity, those facts and the 
pertinent discussions under Guideline J are incorporated herein. In substance, Applicant 
engaged in a conspiracy to suppress or eliminate competition by allocating customers, 
rigging contract bids, and price fixing that resulted in government contracts being 
awarded at inflated prices.  
 
In May 2005, an individual brought a civil lawsuit against Applicant, his company, 
and approximately 60 other defendants. Applicant was added as a defendant in the 
lawsuit in June 2006. Because the lawsuit was filed under seal, Applicant was not 
notified of the existence of the civil lawsuit or of the criminal charges against him until 
May 2009. At the time Applicant submitted his 2007 SCA, he was not aware of either 
the lawsuit or the criminal charges against him. He settled the civil lawsuit and paid a 
settlement of $1,000,000.  
 
Applicant’s criminal misconduct triggered the applicability the following 
disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists three conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
  For the same reasons discussed under Guideline J, I find that none of the 
personal conduct mitigating conditions are fully raised by the facts in this case. 
Applicant orchestrated, managed, and supervised a criminal conspiracy to suppress 
and eliminate competition by allocating customers, rigging bids, and fixing prices for 
government contracts. He committed a felony by taking advantage of his position, 
knowledge, and experience. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s 
personal conduct continues to cast serious doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgement. His evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security 
concerns. 
 The Government failed to establish SOR ¶ 2.b, that allegation is decided for 
Applicant. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 71-year-old successful entrepreneur, accomplished businessman, 
and a leader with unique skills. His references consider him to be honest, trustworthy, 
and a man of principle and of high integrity. Some of his references endorsed his 
eligibility for a security clearance without reservations.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant is a felon who took advantage of his position of trust 
to commit a crime against the government. Applicant’s efforts to minimize his 
involvement in the criminal conspiracy he orchestrated are not credible. This lack of 
 
9 
 
 
credibility and his unwillingness to accept responsibility for his past criminal misconduct 
continue to raise serious questions and doubts about his rehabilitation. Considering the 
evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s past criminal behavior continues to cast 
serious doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
