 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04281 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William H. Henderson, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on March 5, 2016, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on 
August 17, 2016. He responded to the FORM with an affidavit and attached documents 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through Z. The case was assigned to me on July 
3, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM, Applicant’s response to the 
FORM, and AE A through Z are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2005. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1979 
until he retired in 1999. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he has held for 
more than 35 years. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 2006, and a 
master’s degree, which was awarded in 2014. He is married for the second time. He 
has four children and an adult stepchild.1 
  
 The SOR alleges six medical debts totaling $9,788; six defaulted student loans in 
excess of $88,000; a loan on a time-share that was $527 past due with a $527 balance; 
and that Applicant defaulted on a mortgage loan, the creditor foreclosed on the property 
in 2009, and reclaimed the property to satisfy the defaulted mortgage. In his SOR 
response, Applicant admitted owing all of the debts at one point, but he stated that a 
number of the debts had been paid and two of the student loans were duplicate 
accounts. The credit reports submitted by the Government show that a $61 medical 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) and the $527 time-share debt (SOR ¶ 1.b) were paid before the 
FORM was issued.2 
 
 One of Applicant’s children had protracted emotional and medical problems that 
resulted in inpatient treatment for almost two months on one occasion and about six 
months on another occasion in a state more than a thousand miles away. His other 
children also had unexpected medical issues. Applicant and his family have medical 
insurance by virtue of his military retirement. However, some bills were not properly 
submitted to his insurance; there were copayments; and he incurred substantial costs 
for his family to travel and visit his child. His wife had several periods of unemployment, 
and when she returned to work it was at a reduced salary. He lost a rental property to 
foreclosure in 2009 after his tenants moved out, and he was unable to rent the property. 
There is no evidence of any remaining deficiency owed on the mortgage loan. Applicant 
or his insurance company paid or otherwise resolved all of the medical debts alleged in 
the SOR.3 
 
 A collection company was assigned four of Applicant’s defaulted student loans 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.j-1.m). The balance in February 2016 was $78,404. The collection company 
made a settlement offer on the creditor’s behalf to accept $12,806 as full settlement of 
the debt. Applicant took a loan from his 401(k) retirement account and paid the 
settlement amount.4 
 
 The SOR alleges two additional student loans. Applicant admitted owing the 
$16,287 defaulted student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This is a consolidated loan that 
                                                          
1 Item 4; AE W. 
 
2 Items 3, 5-7; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A, B. 
 
3 Items 3-8; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A, E-I, N. 
 
4 Items 3, 5-7; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A, J, K. 
 
3 
 
was transferred to another agency. As of May 2016, the loan was in good standing and 
Applicant was making monthly payments even though the loan was in forbearance.5  
 
 The $1,127 past-due student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was transferred to the 
government for collection. It is unclear whether it became part of the loans that were 
consolidated and now being paid or part of the loans that were settled and paid. In 
either event, it is a duplicate account.6 
 
Applicant worked in Afghanistan for a year as a means of earning extra money to 
pay his debts. His finances are currently in order. He stated that he is “resolved to pay 
closer attention to [his] personal finances and never allow a situation like this to occur in 
the future.”7 
 
Applicant submitted letters and documents attesting to his excellent job 
performance, honesty, leadership, loyalty, trustworthiness, judgment, professionalism, 
dependability, reliability, dedication, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 5-7; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A, C, D. 
 
6 Items 3, 5-7; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A. 
 
7 Items 3-7; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE O-R. 
 
8 AE S-V, X, Y. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by his children’s medical problems, 
his wife’s unemployment, and the loss of his tenants at his rental property. He worked in 
Afghanistan for a year as a means of earning extra money to pay his debts. All of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR have been paid, settled, in good standing and 
being paid, or otherwise resolved. His finances are currently in order, and financial 
concerns have been mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, his work history, and his 
favorable character evidence. He resolved every debt alleged in the SOR, and his 
current finances are sound.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
