                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
)     ISCR Case No.15-07520
)
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated June 6, 2016. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines were issued on December 10, 2016, and became effective on June 8,
2017.1
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on February 15, 2017. A notice of hearing was issued on May 9, 2017,
In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department      1
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines became effective June 8, 2017. My decision and
formal findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.
1
scheduling the hearing for August 3, 2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-3 were
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any
exhibits at the hearing. I kept the record open for additional submission ,and Applicant
timely sent Applicant Exhibits (AX ) A-H for the record. The transcript was received on
August 9, 2017.  Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted allegations in SOR ¶ 1, with the
exception of ¶ 1c. He provided explanations for the allegations under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).  
Applicant is a 41-year-old service technician for a defense contractor. He is
single and has one stepchild. He obtained an associate’s degree in 2006. He has
additional technical certificates. Due to his employer’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2009, he
lost a ten-year position with that company. He has worked for his current employer
since 2014.  Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) in 2015. (GX
1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state income
tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013; an indebtedness to the Federal Government
for delinquent taxes in the amount of approximately $1,843 for tax year 2011; a medical
account in collection for $100; a charged-off account in the amount of $4,655; a
charged-off account in the amount of $11,850; a charged-off account in the amount of
$6,742; and a charged-off account in the amount of $14,235.
Applicant lost employment unexpectedly and with short notice in 2009, due to the
company closing. He had worked with that company for a decade and was in fine
financial condition. Applicant maintained an almost 20-year history of excellent credit
before 2009. However, when he lost the employment he began to incur debt. 
Applicant’s father became quite ill at the same time, and Applicant cares for him
on a daily basis. He also provides some financial help to him. (Tr. 20) He received
some unemployment, and decided to work as a contractor with a new company (LLC)
which took more of his resources and savings before turning a profit. In the interim
while the business venture was thriving, his partner left the partnership in 2014. (Tr. 14)
Applicant liquidated his retirement accounts to pay expenses. It took him about a year
to find steady employment. He prioritized his bills during this period. His mortgage
payment was his highest priority, followed by household expenses.
Applicant owns his home, which is valued at about $500,000. He has great
equity in his home and tried to refinance with mortgage companies to get a lower rate
and to cash out to pay his debts. He has not been successful in obtaining any
refinancing. His plan is to take the money from the refinancing and pay all outstanding
2
bills.  As to the debts on the SOR, he claimed some have been paid and with other
accounts he has been systematically making payments. He also stated that he was
working with an organization to help him with the financial issues. 
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant did not timely file his Federal income tax
returns for  tax years 2012 and 2013. At the hearing Applicant still had not filed, but
noted that he had the forms completed. He wanted to pay other bills first. He stated that
he did not have the funds to file in a timely manner. He is not certain how much he will
owe in tax for those years. He hopes to pay in a lump sum. (Tr. 28) Applicant also
noted that he has not filed his 2014 Federal tax return. (Tr. 28)
As to SOR allegation 1.b, Applicant did not timely file his state income tax returns
for tax years 2012 and 2013. He did not have the money to fulfill the debt. (Tr. 34) In
2016, Applicant stated the state filed his income tax returns for 2012 and 2013 and sent
Applicant a bill for the amount of tax owed ($11,000).  Applicant submitted a copy of his
pay stub from 2016 showing that a garnishment of $400 a month is in place. (AX F ) He
sent another document which showed outstanding liabilities for unpaid taxes for 2012-
2014. (AX E) It is not clear from the document whether payments were made. 
As to SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant owed the Federal Government $1,843 in
delinquent taxes for tax year 2011. As a post-hearing submission, he sent a copy of a
check payable to the IRS, dated August 26, 2013 in the amount of $1,000. (AX G)
along with a payment voucher for tax year 2011. He submitted a copy of a money order
in the amount of $500, but it was not possible to determine if it was for the tax owed. In
any event, the two checks did not total $1,843, and at the hearing he stated that in April
2016, he paid the full amount. 
As to SOR allegation 1.d, Applicant owed $100 for a medical account that was
placed in collection status. Applicant submitted documentation that the account has
been paid. (AX A)
As to SOR allegation 1.e, Applicant owed $4,655 for a charged-off account. He
provided information that he has been making small monthly payments and the balance
is $3,693. The payments ended in late 2014 and are about $52 a month. (AX A)
Applicant stated that he has not contacted the creditor to negotiate payment
arrangements. (Tr. 41)
As to SOR allegation 1.f, Applicant owed $11,850 for a charged-off account. His
most recent credit bureau report shows that as of July 2017, $3,850 was past due.
However, it also notes that the balance on July 25, 2017, was $11,400. A final note
states that the account was written off in the amount of $14,000. Applicant stated the
account became delinquent in 2014 or 2015, and he was sued by the company. The
2016 judgment has not been satisfied.
As to SOR allegation 1.g, Applicant owed $6,742 for a charged-off account.
Applicant had made some payments, but stopped in 2016. (AX A) He has not contacted
them recently to arrange payments . (Tr. 48)
3
As to SOR allegation 1.h, Applicant owed $14,235 for a charged-off account. It
was not clear from the submission, if any payments had been made in recent years.
(AX A) At the hearing, he stated that he has not contacted them.
Applicant submitted a 2017 credit bureau report (AX A) that shows ten non-SOR
accounts that are in current status. The account notes reflect that his mortgage account
and credit union account are open and never late. He points to this as a good-faith
effort to pay his bills.  
Applicant volunteered a submission for the city in which he resides, which shows
that there is a payment plan schedule and a written notation that he paid $175 on
August 15, 2017. The amount of property tax owed is $1,830 and the monthly payment
plan ends in May 2018. (AX C) Applicant stated at the hearing that he has been paying
for about four or five months. The document does not reflect that he made a payment
of $1,800, as Applicant claimed. (Tr. 43)
 Applicant earns an hourly wage and his net monthly income ranges from $2,400
to $3,200. He has a monthly car payment of $460.  He believes he has $100 in savings,
and he has a 401(k) retirement account in the amount of $13,000 (Tr. ) He does not
have a written budget. He has two credit cards that he uses that carry balances each
month. (Tr. 54) He does not have any discretionary income at the end of the month
after his expenses are paid. (Tr. 23)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
4
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
5
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially over-extended is at a greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including
espionage.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability to satisfy debts;
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual  Federal, state, or local income
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required;
The Government produced credible evidence to establish Applicant’s delinquent
debts and his failure to timely file federal and state tax returns for tax years 2012 and
2013. Applicant acknowledged that he also did not file in 2014.  Consequently, the
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c) and 19(f).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and
6
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.
Applicant had an unexpected loss of employment in 2009, but he then became a
contractor and made some income. He also takes care of his elderly father. He has
been steadily employed since 2014. He did not timely file his Federal and state income
taxes in 2012 and 2013. The state filed for him in 2016, but he has not yet filed the
Federal tax returns. He states that he has no discretionary income at the end of the
month. He has paid one or two SOR accounts and is beginning a payment plan for the
state taxes that he owes. He has not received any financial counseling. He also has
collection accounts that he is not currently paying. He submitted a 2017 credit bureau
report that shows he does have other accounts that are current in pay status. Some of
the delinquent debt was incurred due to unforseen circumstances, but that does not
apply to the filing of income taxes. His plan is to refinance his home to pay all his debt.
However, he has not had success with that plan.  He has not acted responsibly in this
case. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part. None of the other mitigating
conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶2(d)
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He worked for a company for ten years that suddenly
went bankrupt. He had work as a contractor, but he stated that it was not profitable. He
is helping his elderly father. He encountered circumstances beyond his control. He
started working full time in a steady position in 2014. Since that time he has not made
payments on the majority of the delinquent SOR debts, nor has he put in place payment
7
plan. He is relying on a refinancing of his home in order to pay his debts. This is not
sufficient to carry his burden. The documents that Applicant submitted show that he has
current accounts, but he did not provide documentation that was clear concerning the
status of the state taxes.  His documents do not provide a clear picture of the current
status of the state taxes or how the delinquent state taxes are being paid and the
outstanding balance.
Applicant has not filed his Federal tax returns for the years in question and the
state filed for him because he had not filed for tax years 2012 ands 2013. He
volunteered that he has not filed his 2014 tax return either. He intends to pay his debts
and file his Federal tax returns but he needs help. He still has unresolved debt despite
his good intentions. He has supported his father who is ill. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and
evaluating all the record evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F. Accordingly, I
conclude that he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e:-1.h:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
8
