 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-08005 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She presented sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from a history of financial 
problems. She did not falsify her security clearance application when she failed to 
disclose her financial problems. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on May 6, 2015. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on March 5, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
 
2 
 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
and Guideline E for personal conduct (falsification).   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 28, 2016; her responses were mixed; and 
her answer included a one-page memorandum in explanation. She also requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The hearing took place as scheduled on 
December 6, 2016. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on December 14, 2016.     
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee who is seeking a security clearance for the 
first time for her employment as a federal contractor. She has worked as a security 
guard since April 2015. Before that, she was unemployed for about three months. 
Before that, she worked as a security guard for about two months. Before that, she 
worked as an office assistant from October 2014 to January 2015. Before that, she 
worked as a cashier in a full-time temporary position for about two months. Before that, 
she was unemployed from August 2014 to November 2014. And before that, she 
worked full-time as a warehouse worker from July 2012 to August 2014, when she was 
terminated due to a safety violation.    
 
Applicant’s educational background includes an associate’s degree awarded in 
April 2006. She explained that she has a learning or reading disability (slight dyslexia) 
that interferes with her reading comprehension. She presented a high-school education 
record showing that she was placed in a resource room for the subjects of English and 
math.1 She attended a technical college during 2004-2006, which she financed via 
student loans.    
 
In her May 2015 security clearance application, Applicant, in response to 
Question 26 concerning financial matters, answered all questions in the negative, 
thereby denying any delinquent, collection, or past-due accounts as well as other 
financial problems (e.g., failure to timely file tax returns).2 The background investigation 
established otherwise.3 She denied that she deliberately falsified her answers to 
Question 26, and she explained that she did not understand the question due to her 
reading disability.  
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems consisting of 20 items grouped 
together as follows: (1) ten medical collection accounts for a total of about $6,451; (2) a 
mortgage loan with a past-due balance of $2,266; (3) six student loan accounts in 
collection for a total of about $21,111; and (4) three consumer collection accounts for a 
total of about $2,494. The SOR allegations are established by Applicant’s admissions 
and the documentary evidence.4 
                                                          
1 Exhibit F.  
 
2 Exhibit 1.  
 
3 Exhibit 5.  
 
4 Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and 5.  
 
3 
 
Applicant explained the ten medical collection accounts should have been paid 
for by a state medical assistance program that she has been on-and-off since about 
2004. She presented a document showing she was on the program from September 
2014 to March 2016.5 The document is from the state medical assistance program and 
is seeking to have Applicant verify her eligibility. It does not indicate that any of the ten 
medical collection accounts were covered. 
 
Applicant explained and presented documentation showing that the mortgage 
loan is no longer past due.6 The documentation shows she has made the required 
monthly payment since August 2016. 
 
Applicant explained and provided documentation that her defaulted student loan 
accounts were rehabilitated and consolidated into two loan accounts.7 Based on 
hardship, she was allowed to pay $5 monthly for 11 months and the loans were then 
considered rehabilitated.8 The documentation shows that seven student loan accounts, 
with disbursement dates of 2004-2005, were rehabilitated and consolidated. There are 
now two accounts with a current principal balance of $23,866 and a total monthly 
payment of $123.89. She stated that her payments on the loan accounts are current 
with no delinquencies, and she provided documentation showing that she made $125 
monthly loan payments from January 2016 through November 2016.9 
 
Concerning the three collection accounts, Applicant presented documentation 
showing one account had been reduced to a judgment In October 2013, and it was 
satisfied in full via garnishment of her wages in May 2016.10 She explained that she 
allowed her wages to be garnished rather than making voluntary payments on the 
judgment because that was the simplest way to resolve the matter. She denied the 
$127 collection account on the basis that she never had an account with the public 
library, the original creditor. She had no documentation for that account, nor did she 
have documentation for a $407 collection account, which she claims was paid several 
years ago. 
 
Applicant stated that both she and her husband have had health problems over 
the years that have adversely impacted their finances.11 Her husband became unable to 
work for several years due to back problems and received disability compensation for 
part of that period. He’s returned to work recently as a security guard for the same 
                                                          
5 Exhibit A.  
 
6 Exhibit E.  
 
7 Exhibit B.  
 
8 Tr. 52-53.  
 
9 Tr. 56; Exhibit D.  
 
10 Exhibit C.  
 
11 Tr. 57-62. 
 
 
4 
 
company as Applicant. She estimated their 2016 gross income at about $51,000. They 
spend about $600 monthly, out-of-pocket, for prescription medicine for her husband.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.12 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.13 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”14 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.15 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.16 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.17 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.18 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.19 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.20 
                                                          
12 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
13 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
14 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
16 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
 
5 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.21 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.22 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.23 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.   
 
 The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic 
financial history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. With that said, it 
is evident the financial problems were made more difficult to resolve due to health 
                                                          
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
22 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
23 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
problems and the resulting loss of income. It is also evident that Applicant is doing the 
best she can within her means to resolve her delinquent debts. To that end, she 
presented reliable documentation showing that the delinquent student loan accounts 
were rehabilitated and she has made the required monthly payment for several months. 
Likewise, her mortgage loan is no longer past due. She resolved one of collection 
accounts, which was reduced to judgment, via garnishment of her wages. The medical 
collection accounts and the two minor collection accounts remain unresolved at this 
point. Although she did not present a perfect case in mitigation, she presented sufficient 
evidence to establish that she is managing her financial affairs in a responsible fashion.  
 
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special concern is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.”24 A statement is false when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not 
deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be 
reported.  
 
 As for the falsification allegation under Guideline E, I am simply not persuaded 
that Applicant’s failure to disclose bills or debts turned over to a collection agency in the 
past seven years was deliberate. Applicant is not a highly sophisticated person and she 
had never before completed a security clearance application. Her claim that she did not 
understand Question 26 is credible.   
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a 
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or 
vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that 
she met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
                                                          
24 AG ¶ 15.  
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
