 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04753 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, G, alcohol consumption, and 
J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 28, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 7, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant objected to GE 5 and 6. The objection was 
sustained. GE 1, 2, 3, 4, and 7 were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and 
offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript on June 15, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g. He denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He served in the military from 1996 to 2003, and was 
honorably discharged in the paygrade O-3. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1999 and 
master’s degree in 2011. Applicant married in 2005 and divorced in 2006. He remarried 
in 2016. He and his wife have a two-year-old child. He has worked for his present 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2012 and for other federal contractors since 2004.2  
 
 In 2002, while on active duty in the military, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). He was speeding. The police report 
shows his breathalyzer recorded .143%. Applicant admitted he was drinking alcohol 
before he was arrested. The charge was reduced to speeding/reckless driving and the 
DUI was nolle prosequi. He admitted he learned little from this experience because he 
was young.3 
 
 In November 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. He testified he 
failed a field sobriety test. He went to court and was placed on probation for a year. 
After he completed probation, the charge was dismissed. Applicant was required to 
attend a 12-week alcohol awareness program. He testified that he learned a lot. When 
he completed the program, he was told not to drink and drive, and to make better 
decisions. He continued to consume alcohol.4  
 
 In May 2010, Applicant was charged with assault on a family member. He stated 
that an angry ex-girlfriend falsely accused him of the offense. He said the charge was 
dismissed. There is no evidence of a conviction.5 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 Tr. 16-19. 
 
3 Tr. 32, 38-40, 75. 
 
4 Tr. 40-46, 75-77. 
 
5 Tr. 55-57. 
 
3 
 
 
 In December 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI). In May 2011, he was found guilty. He was sentenced to 30 days in 
jail, which was suspended, and a fine. His driver’s license was restricted and he was 
ordered to attend an alcohol awareness class. He completed a 12-week alcohol 
awareness class. He was told not to drink and drive. He testified that he again learned a 
lot from the class and was told to make better decisions. He stated that this was still an 
issue he needed to work on. He continued to consume alcohol after this arrest.6  
 
 In February 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI. In March 2013, 
he was found guilty of the charge. He was required to attend a 12-week alcohol 
awareness class. The class was the same one he had taken before. He saw a medical 
professional and was diagnosed with alcohol abuse.7  
 
 In March 2014, Applicant was charged with attempting to drive a vehicle while 
under the influence of alcohol and while impaired. He was sitting in a vehicle at the time 
of his arrest. He testified that he had been drinking alcohol earlier in the day. After his 
arrest, he refused to take a field sobriety test. The charges were later dropped and 
expunged from his record.8 
  
 In November 2007, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
Question 23 asked: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) 
related to alcohol or drugs.” Applicant responded “no,” failing to disclose that in 2002 he 
was arrested and charged with DUI. Applicant explained he did not disclose this 
information because he followed advice from his security manager. He stated that the 
security manager told him not to disclose anything he was charged with, but only 
disclose convictions. This is contrary to the plain language of the question. He did not 
disclose on his 2007 SCA that he was convicted of reckless driving after consuming 
alcohol.9  
 
 In February 2013, Applicant completed another SCA. Question 22 asked: “Other 
than those offenses already listed, have you EVER had the following happen to you? . . 
.. Have you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?” Applicant 
responded “no.” He failed to disclose his December 2002 arrest and charge of DUI or 
subsequent reduction to reckless driving, and his November 2009 arrest and charge of 
DWI. Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose the 2002 charge was that he thought 
the offense was outside of a seven-year-window; he did not pay attention to the details 
of the question; and he read the question wrong. He explained that he did not disclose 
the 2009 charge because he thought he had already disclosed it in the SCA when it 
asked about criminal offenses. He did not. In addition, he stated it was an oversight. 
                                                          
6 Tr. 30, 46, 77-78. 
 
7 Tr. 78-80. 
 
8 Tr. 52-54; Answer to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. 20-25, 34-38, 46-50; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s explanations for his failure to disclose his 2002 DUI charge on his 2007 SCA 
or his failure to disclose this charge and the 2009 DUI charge on his 2013 SCA are not 
credible. I find he deliberately failed to disclose this information.10 
 
 In April 2015, Applicant completed government interrogatories and swore to the 
information’s’ accuracy. He disclosed his March 2014 charges as listed above that were 
later expunged and occurred after he completed his 2013 SCA. He further disclosed 
that he was last intoxicated on March 29, 2014, the date of his arrest. He disclosed that 
he participated in six-month alcohol awareness programs, in April 2013 and again 
March 2014. He stated in the interrogatories: “Quit for Good!” He further stated: “My life 
has changed, I now have a son that I live for. I have No desire to consume alcohol, I am 
proud of my sobriety.”11  
 
 During one of Applicant’s alcohol awareness class he was seen by an alcohol 
counselor. In the discharge summary from June 21, 2011, his counselor wrote: 
 
[Applicant] was a moderately active member of this [s]ixteen [w]eek DWI 
Counseling Program. While in the Program, [Applicant] followed all the 
rules and said the right things but it would seem that he was simply going 
through the motions. He continues to resist any participation in AA 
although participation in that program would provide the transitional 
support we feel [Applicant] needs. [Applicant] never quite grasped the 
reality that treating alcohol abuse and his depression and Diabetes must 
go hand in hand. [Applicant] now knows what it takes to maintain sobriety, 
the strategies for self-diagnosis and the community resources available 
should he find himself at risk of relapse. He needs only to utilize those 
tools.12  
 
Applicant was discharged from the program on November 7, 2011, and his 
prognosis was “guarded.”13  
 
Notes from a new counselor during a subsequent alcohol awareness class from 
April 2013, stated: [Applicant] has given up drinking and had not drank in the last 30 
plus days.” Additional comments stated: “[Applicant] appears to be motivated to change 
his/her substance use patterns.” Further comments noted: “[Applicant] has stopped 
using alcohol and continues to show a high desire to stop due to his expecting new 
children.”14 He was discharged from his program on October 16, 2013, with a diagnosis 
of alcohol abuse and no discharge recommendations.15  
                                                          
10 Tr. 25-32, 36-38, 46-50. 
 
11 Tr. 84; GE 3. 
 
12 GE 4. 
 
13 GE 4. 
 
14 GE 4. 
 
5 
 
 
In March 2014, after his arrest, Applicant voluntarily attended another alcohol 
program because he believed it would help his court case. Applicant’s new alcohol 
counselor noted the following: [Applicant] appears to be motivated to change his/her 
substance use patterns.” The counselor stated: “This interviewer rates [Applicant’s] 
overall readiness to change as being in the Contemplation stage.”16 Applicant disclosed 
that his frequency of use was 1-2 times per week and that he has never tried to reduce 
or control his use of alcohol. He indicated that no one told him to stop using alcohol. His 
discharge summary indicates he was stable and prognosis was good.17  
 
Applicant admitted that he has a history of alcohol consumption, at times to 
excess and to the point of intoxication, beginning in about June 1995. He continued to 
consume alcohol sporadically after his last arrest in March 2014 until February 2015. He 
has had setbacks. He does not believe he consumed any alcohol in 2015 because his 
wife was pregnant. He stated he last consumed alcohol about eight months ago, likely 
during a sporting event. He estimated he consumed alcohol three times in 2016. He 
continues to consume alcohol.18 
 
Applicant testified that he attended court-ordered Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings, but did not like them. He does not currently attend AA. He attended some 
counseling sessions offered to him by a friend. Her certifications are unknown. He 
stated that his proven method of dealing with alcohol is to remove himself from the 
environment and spend time with his family. He does not believe he was a “full-blown 
alcoholic,”19 but believes he was headed in that direction and at times he has had a 
problem. His recent marriage keeps him from drinking. He has been doing his best to 
stay away from alcohol. He has been seeing his pastor for about 12-months. He speaks 
with him about twice a month to address his urges to consume alcohol and depression 
issues. His pastor provided a letter confirming their meetings, and that Applicant is 
making progress and drinking appears to be less of an issue as other concerns have 
been explored. No information was provided regarding the pastor’s educational 
background, certifications, or experience in the area of alcohol counseling.20 
 
Applicant provided a character letter from a friend who describes him as an 
honest and trustworthy person. He stated that Applicant has integrity and lives his life by 
principles and values.21 Applicant also provided copies of awards and certificates.22 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15 Tr. 69; GE 4. 
 
16 GE 4. 
 
17 Tr. 70-73, 80-81; Answer to SOR. 
 
18 Tr. 62-63, 82, 84. 
 
19 Tr. 64. 
 
20 Tr. 59-67, 87-89; AE C. 
 
21 AE C. 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
22 AE C. 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following to be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 Applicant admitted he was arrested and charged five times with alcohol-related 
offenses, four of which were DUI or DWI. He was convicted three times of DUI or DWI. 
He was diagnosed with alcohol abuse disorder. He has a history of consuming alcohol 
sometimes to the point of excess or intoxication from 1995 to at least March 2014. He 
continues to consume alcohol. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from alcohol consumption. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations.  
 
Applicant continues to consume alcohol despite statements made to alcohol 
counselors and in his interrogatories that he no longer drinks. He has participated in at 
least three alcohol awareness classes, each lasting 12 weeks. His pastor is presently 
counseling him. He has three DUI/DWI convictions. Applicant’s long history of alcohol 
use, from 1995 to the present, and the negative effect it has had on him, has not 
deterred him to earnestly change his consumption of alcohol. Based on that long history 
of repeated conduct, there is insufficient evidence to conclude the behavior was 
infrequent, or that it happened under unique circumstances, and it is unlikely to recur. 
His conduct continues to casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant admitted his alcohol-related conduct and his continued use, but 
believes it is under control. Other than speaking with his pastor during the past year, he 
has not provided substantive evidence of actions he has taken to address his problems, 
such as participating in a legitimate alcohol treatment program with a bona fide alcohol 
counselor or abstaining from alcohol use for a significant period. He has an established 
pattern of being involved in alcohol-related criminal conduct, attending alcohol 
awareness programs, modifying his consumption for a period, and then engaging in 
another alcohol-related incident. This pattern has repeated itself since his first arrest in 
2002. There is limited information from Applicant’s pastor regarding the specifics of his 
counseling and his credentials. AG ¶ 23(c) has some application. Although Applicant 
reluctantly acknowledges some issues with his alcohol use, there is insufficient 
evidence to prove that he has established a sustained pattern of modified consumption. 
Instead, his pattern is to stop drinking after he has an alcohol incident, and then resume 
after a period-of-time. He has completed three alcohol awareness programs, but there 
is no evidence that he has completed a treatment program. Based on Applicant’s 
repeated history AG ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
  
 
9 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 31, and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal conduct. He was arrested and charged four 
times with DUI/DWI. He was convicted three times, although the 2009 conviction was 
expunged after he completed a period of probation. In addition, the 2002 offense was 
reduced to reckless driving. His breathalyzer recorded .143%, well over the legal limit. 
Applicant admitted he had been drinking alcohol before this arrest. He was also 
arrested in 2014 with attempting to drive a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. 
That charge was ultimately dismissed. Applicant admitted he had been consuming 
alcohol earlier in the day. Applicant was also arrested and charged in 2010 with assault 
on a family member. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
  
Regarding the 2010 assault charge, there is insufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant committed this offense. AG ¶ 32 applies to SOR ¶ 2.b. The same analysis that 
was explained under the alcohol consumption guideline applies to Applicant’s criminal 
conduct. Despite his repeated arrests and three convictions, he has not provided 
sufficient evidence to conclude that his conduct is unlikely to recur. The character 
 
10 
 
 
evidence provided was considered, but it is insufficient to mitigate Applicant’s significant 
and recurring criminal conduct. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress b a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual group. Such conduct includes: 
(1) engaging in activities which if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on his 2007 SCA that in 2002 he was 
arrested and charged with DUI. On his 2013 SCA, he deliberately failed to disclose his 
2002 and 2009 arrests and charges for DUI. I did not find his explanations for failing to 
disclose these offenses credible.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
 
11 
 
 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his 
omissions before being confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Applicant 
claimed his security manager told him he did not have to disclose that he was arrested 
and charged with DUI in 2002. Question 22 asked if he had been charged or convicted 
of any offense(s) related to alcohol and drugs. Although the 2002 DUI was reduced to 
reckless driving, Applicant did not disclose he was convicted of the lesser offense, 
which involved alcohol. There is insufficient corroborating evidence that Applicant was 
merely following his security manager’s advice when told he only needed to disclose 
convictions. His failure to disclose the reduced charge and subsequent conviction of 
reckless driving that involved alcohol contradicts his explanation. He admitted that he 
consumed alcohol and the breathalyzer recording was .143%. The plain language of the 
question needs little interpretation. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant repeated that conduct when he deliberately failed to disclose his 2002 
alcohol-related arrest and his 2009 DUI charge. I did not find his explanations credible. 
Applicant is an educated person with two college degrees and served as a military 
officer. To claim he thought he had previously listed the two DUI offenses on a different 
page of the SCA without confirming whether he disclosed the requested information is 
disingenuous. His conduct is not minor or infrequent, and it casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s alcohol consumption and criminal conduct were cross-alleged under 
the personal conduct guideline. His personal conduct regarding his alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct is not mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c) based on the same analysis 
provided under those respective guidelines.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
12 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G, J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old educated man, who served as an officer in the military 
for approximately seven years. He has a history of consuming alcohol to the point of 
excess from 1995 to the present and was repeatedly arrested, charged, and three times 
convicted of DUI/DWI. Despite attending alcohol awareness programs and promises 
that to abstain from consuming alcohol, he continues to drink alcohol and make poor 
decisions. He deliberately attempted to minimize his alcohol issues and criminal 
conduct by failing to disclose information about his conduct on his 2007 and 2013 
SCAs. Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern arising under the 
alcohol consumption, criminal conduct, and personal conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
