 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-07872 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s 
adverse information about his financial problems. Applicant’s request for eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 9, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
 
On January 22, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 
At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my 
recommended decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On July 6, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on August 26, 2016, and had 30 days from the 
date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant did not provide any 
additional information in response to the FORM. I received the case on July 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $80,841 for seven 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.g). The $36,135 debt at SOR 1.a represents 
the amount past due on Applicant’s mortgage. If that mortgage were now in default, the 
total debt at issue in this case would reflect the entire $106,089 loan balance. Applicant 
denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. (FORM, Item 3) In addition to the 
facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor, 
first as a temporary employee then as a permanent employee, since July 2010. He 
previously worked in a similar position between August 2002 and February 2010. At that 
time, his job relocated to another state, but he could not sell his house or afford to move 
because he and his ex-wife were in the process of divorcing. Applicant and his wife 
were married from May 1998 until February 2010. In addition to being unable to sell the 
marital residence so he could follow his job, he also wanted to remain close to his 
children, who were four and seventeen at the time. Applicant was unemployed from 
March 2010 until July 2010. (FORM, Items 3, 4 and 6) 
 
 Most of the debts at issue here became delinquent at or near when Applicant 
was unemployed and divorced. He averred that the mortgage accounts at SOR 1.a and 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on six enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 - 6). 
5 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
1.c pertain to his marital residence at the time of his divorce. Those mortgages went into 
default in 2009. The lender subsequently foreclosed and resold the property at auction. 
Applicant believes he has no further obligation on these debts, but he did not produce 
information the lender would provide to Applicant reflecting what it reported to the IRS 
regarding disposition of the loan. (FORM 3 – 6) 
 
 Applicant responded in similar fashion regarding a delinquent car loan debt 
alleged at SOR 1.d. In December 2010, Applicant voluntarily returned a motor vehicle to 
the dealer / lender because he could no longer afford the car loan payments. Applicant 
avers he has heard nothing from the dealer in the six years that have elapsed since he 
returned the vehicle. Based on this, Applicant believes he no longer owes this debt. 
Likewise, the creditor holding the credit card debt at SOR 1.b charged off the debt as a 
business loss. This leads Applicant to believe he no longer owes that debt. (FORM, 
Items 3 – 6) 
 
 Finally, Applicant does not have any information about the SOR 1.e debt. He 
claimed that he settled the debt at SOR 1.f and that he resolved the debt at SOR 1.g 
through a 2004 bankruptcy petition. In response to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant 
did not present any information to support the claims made in his Answer. (FORM, Item 
3) 
 
 Applicant served in the Army from March 1995 until February 2001. He attributes 
his financial problems, in part, to poor financial decisions he made after leaving active 
duty. He also cited the fact that he lost seven months of work in 2003 due to an on-the-
job injury. This coincided with his ex-wife’s pregnancy with their younger child. Applicant 
has not received any professional financial assistance or counseling. (FORM, Items 3, 
4, and 6)  
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.10 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.11 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s debts reasonably raised the 
security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
                                                 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 Directive, E3.1.15. 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
11 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, the Government’s information requires application of the 
disqualifying condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history of 
not meeting financial obligations). 
 
Because the Government’s information supported the SOR allegations, it was 
incumbent on Applicant to provide information to support application of any or all of the 
AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. In assessing the applicability of the mitigating conditions, 
I note that Applicant’s financial problems began as early as 2004, the year he claims he 
filed bankruptcy. He made some poor financial decisions after leaving the Army in 2001, 
and his finances worsened around 2009 and 2010 with the loss of a job, the foreclosure 
of his house, and the end of his marriage. These circumstances might support 
application of the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
6 
 
Applicant did not meet his burden of production here because he did not show 
that he acted responsibly or that his financial problems will not recur. There is no 
information from any lender that cancels his debt or reflects other resolution that ended 
his obligation on a debt. He did not present any information showing he has been 
paying any of his debts; that supports any dispute he has with his creditors; or that he 
has received any professional financial counseling or other assistance with his debts. 
The security concerns established by the Government’s information are not mitigated.   
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant presented plausible 
explanations for the circumstances surrounding his financial problems. Nonetheless, he 
did not produce corroborating information sufficient to resolve the doubts raised herein 
about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of 
the interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, any 
remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
