 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ADP Case No. 15-07990 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate concerns 
raised by her history of financial problems evidenced by approximately $25,000 in 
unresolved delinquent debt. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s access to sensitive information and 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 27, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She received 
the FORM on May 4, 2016, and did not respond. The items appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 The document identified as GE 4 
is excluded as explained below.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Inadmissibility of Report of Investigation (ROI) 
 
 GE 4 is a ROI summarizing the interview Applicant had with an investigator in 
September 9, 2015. The interview, which contains adverse information, has not been 
authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM 
advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions her that if she fails to object to the 
admission of the interview summary in her response to the FORM that her failure may 
be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to respond to 
the FORM or, specifically, to Footnote 1 does not demonstrate that she understands the 
concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not establish that she 
understands the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. 
Accordingly, GE 4 is inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 29, completed an eligibility application in June 2015. She indicated 
that she experienced delinquency involving routine accounts, including a car loan, 
student loans, and a cell phone account. The ensuing investigation revealed that 
Applicant owes additional delinquent accounts. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes 
approximately $25,000 on 14 delinquent accounts. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted each of the delinquent accounts. She indicated that some of the debt is now 
being paid and that she is making arrangements to pay others. However, she did not 
provide any documentation to corroborate her claims. The alleged debts remain 
unresolved.3 
 
Law and Policy 
 
This case is adjudicated under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1-3, 5. 
 
3 
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. The record 
establishes a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial 
obligations and an inability to pay her bills.4 All of the alleged accounts remain 
unresolved.  None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a 
position of trust. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant failed to meet her burdens of production and persuasion 
to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. She did not provide any evidence to show 
financial rehabilitation or reform. Accordingly, her request is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Applicant’s eligibility 
to occupy a position of trust is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
4 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
