 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08162 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the use of information technology security concerns, but he 
did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and M (use of information technology). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
August 1, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 27, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for April 5, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called two witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
 
2 
 
through I, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on April 18, 2017.  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor since 
1999. He has held a security clearance for almost 30 years. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. He has been married for more than 20 years. He does not have children.1 
  
 Applicant was traveling extensively for work in 2013, which placed a strain on his 
marriage. During a work trip in late 2013, he used his company laptop computer to 
access adult pornography. He used a flash drive that had a private browser, which he 
incorrectly believed would bypass the firewall and prevent his company from 
discovering his actions.2 
 
 Applicant was permitted to use the flash drive on the company computer, but he 
was not permitted to use the private browser that was on the drive. Viewing 
pornography on the company’s computer was also against company policy. In about 
March 2014, he was suspended from work for one week without pay for his conduct. 
Applicant received therapy from January to April 2014. His counselor wrote that 
Applicant was “forthright, honest, and accountable in acknowledging his lack of 
judgment.” Applicant expressed appropriate remorse for his conduct. He stated that he 
learned a valuable lesson and the conduct will not be repeated. His wife is aware of 
what happened.3 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
June 2014. Under Section 13A – Employment Activities, in regard to his current 
employment, Applicant answered “No” to the following question: 
 
For this employment, in the last seven (7) years have you received a 
written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for 
misconduct in the workplace, such as a violation of security policy? 
 
Applicant also answered “No” to the use of information technology questions under 
Section 27, including the following: 
 
In the last seven (7) years have you introduced, removed, or used 
hardware, software, or media in connection with any information 
technology system without authorization, when specifically prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations, or attempted any of the 
above. 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33-35; GE 1; AE B, C, E. 
 
2 Tr. at 38-44, 75-83; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 38-57, 75-83; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE F. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in April 2015. The 
interviewer asked Applicant to confirm, clarify, and discuss his responses to the SF 86. 
Applicant confirmed his negative response to the question under Section 13A that 
asked if he had been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in 
the workplace. When confronted with his one-week suspension, Applicant admitted that 
he had been suspended for two violations of company policy: the use of the 
unauthorized device on the company laptop and viewing pornography on the laptop. 
When asked why he answered “No” to the question, Applicant responded that he could 
not recall why; that it was an oversight; and he may not have read the question 
correctly.4 
 
Applicant denied intentionally providing false information on the SF 86. He stated 
in his response to the SOR that when he completed the SF 86, his “intention was to put 
the entire situation behind [him].” He wrote that he misinterpreted the questions to be 
limited to those situations involving classified information.  
 
Applicant testified that he “rubberstamped” the SF 86, meaning that he simply 
copied the information from his previous SF 86, and he did not closely read the 
questions. He reiterated that he thought the questions were limited to punishment for 
mishandling classified information.5 
 
I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. After considering all the evidence, 
including Applicant’s age, education, experience, character evidence, and the clear 
wording of the questions, I find that Applicant intentionally falsified both of the relevant 
questions on the SF 86. 
 
 Two witnesses testified, and Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting 
to his excellent job performance, trustworthiness, honesty, professionalism, work ethic, 
leadership, dependability, loyalty, reliability, dedication, and integrity. Applicant is 
recommended for a security clearance.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017.7 
 
                                                          
4 GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 57-69, 83-88. 
 
6 Tr. at 11-32; AE A, D, G. 
7 The SOR was issued under the previous adjudicative guidelines. I have utilized the current adjudicative 
guidelines as required. However, my ultimate decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
4 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology  
 
The security concern for use of information technology is set out in AG ¶ 39: 
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
 Applicant knew he was violating company policy when he used a private browser 
on a flash drive to access adult pornography on his company laptop computer. The 
above disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate the use of information technology systems security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
 The conduct occurred in late 2013, almost four years ago. Applicant received 
therapy and expressed appropriate remorse for his conduct. He stated that he learned a 
valuable lesson and the conduct will not be repeated. AG ¶ 41(a) is applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
6 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 when he failed to report his suspension 
and his misuse of his company’s computer. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Having determined that Applicant intentionally provided false information on the 
SF 86, I have also determined that his explanations that the omission was unintentional 
were also false. It would be inconsistent to find that conduct mitigated.8   
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and M in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s 
character evidence and his intentional violation of company policy. That conduct is 
mitigated. However, his intentionally false information about that conduct on his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions is not mitigated.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the use of information technology security concerns, but he did not mitigate 
the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
