 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07368 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 1, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 19, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for June 14, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
  
The Government’s exhibit list, discovery letter, notice of representation and 
subsequent withdrawal of Applicant’s counsel were appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) 1 through 3. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant’s exhibit lists were appended to the record as HEs 
A and B. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through DD, 
which were admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
At Applicant’s request and with no objection from the Government, I left the 
record open until June 28, 2017, for the parties to submit additional documentation. 
Applicant timely provided documentation, which I marked as AEs EE through LL. The 
Government’s email indicating no objection to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions and 
Applicant’s exhibit list were appended to the record as HEs 4 and C, respectively. AEs 
EE through LL were admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 23, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d, 1.g, and 1.h, and denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. She is 51 years old. She has been married since 1988 and has an 
adult child that lives with them. She obtained a bachelor’s degree in 1987, a master’s 
degree in 2000, and has taken classes towards a doctorate degree since June 2014.2 
 
 Applicant has worked for her current company, a defense contractor (company 
A), since June 2012. She became the owner, president, and CEO of company A in April 
2013, returned company A to its founder by May 2017, and has since worked as 
company A’s facility security officer. She served honorably in the U.S. military from 1987 
until she retired as a lieutenant colonel in 2007. She worked for a prior defense 
contractor, initially as a program manager and eventually as the company’s president, 
from 2007 until she obtained her current job. She started her own company (company 
B) in January 2012, and has since served as its president. She has held a DOD security 
clearance since 1987.3  
 
 The SOR alleges a judgment entered against Applicant by a state in 2015, four 
delinquent mortgage accounts, and three delinquent consumer accounts. The SOR 
allegations are established by Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports.4  
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 17-99; GEs 1-2; AE K. 
 
3 Tr. at 17-99; GEs 1-2; AEs A-F, J-K, S, LL. 
 
4 SOR; Applicant’s SOR response; GEs 3-5; AEs T, DD, FF.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems started in June 2012, when she started working for 
company A as a consultant instead of continuing to build company B that she had 
started in January 2012. She initially earned a small salary at company A, but seized 
the opportunity to learn from a seasoned businessman and grow a business that 
already had past performance and a contract in the process of being renovated. Within 
a few months, she realized she was not going to get paid but still had to generate 
income for company A; her income went from $175,000 annually to zero. She found 
another consulting opportunity to fill the pay gap, but that company fell on hard times 
within five months. She found herself in a monthly deficit of $14,000. She persisted with 
company A because she was given ownership, and she believed her situation would 
improve with hard work and dedication. She supported herself through her husband’s 
income, her military retirement, and her disability payments. She also enrolled in a 
doctorate program through the GI bill, and used the $2,000 monthly stipend to 
supplement her household income.5  
 
 Applicant became 100% owner of company A in April 2013. When company A 
began to gain traction in 2014, Applicant stated that the founder took notice and asked 
for an ownership stake. Applicant agreed, but stated that she told the founder he would 
have to work in company A as a 1099 employee. When Applicant obtained status for 
company A as a service-disabled veteran-owned business, Applicant stated that she 
notified the founder that he was no longer a part of it and sent him a cease and desist 
letter pertaining to company A’s affairs. He then filed a lawsuit against her in September 
2015, he subsequently dropped his lawsuit, Applicant countersued him for forgery and 
fraud, and they settled in June 2017. Applicant incurred a significant amount of 
attorney’s fees as a result.6 
 
 Applicant took less than $10,000 in owner draws from company A between April 
2013 and 2014, as the company was not profitable. She took owner draws of $43,000 in 
2015, $39,000 in 2016, and $12,000 in 2017. She has not taken any draws from 
company A since she transferred it back to its founder by May 2017.7   
 
 As of the hearing date, Applicant stated that she and the founder of company A 
were in the process of implementing the settlement agreement and a March 2017 court 
order. She began the process of transferring the contracts from company A to company 
B in May 2017, and discussions were ongoing as to how much she would have to pay 
for the contracts given she was responsible for bringing them to company A. Once all 
the contracts are transferred to company B, Applicant expects to continue to build 
company B and completely disassociate herself from company A. Applicant stated that 
in retrospect, she should have cut her losses when the founder of company A filed a 
lawsuit against her; she chose not to settle because the founder offered $1.5 million for 
company A that had nothing in it when she became its owner. She described the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 17-99; GEs 1-2; AEs U, EE, LL. 
 
6 Tr. at 17-99; GEs 1-2; AE G. 
 
7 Tr. at 17-99; AE LL. 
 
 
4 
 
decision to become company A’s owner as the “absolute worst decision of my entire 
life.”8   
 
Between 2012 and 2017, Applicant also experienced a tenant who stopped 
paying rent on a rental property that she and her husband purchased and lived in as 
their primary residence from November 2004 until November 2007. The mortgage on 
their current residence that they have lived in since November 2007 increased by 
$2,000, at the conclusion of a trial period during a loan modification process that was 
ongoing as of the date of the hearing. A vendor for company A did not pay for consulting 
work. The founder of company A created unforeseen company bills. Applicant’s father 
became ill and died. Her mother received a serious medical diagnosis. Her daughter 
struggled in college. When Applicant received the SOR in May 2016, she incurred 
additional attorney’s fees when she hired an attorney to initially assist with ensuring she 
would not lose her security clearance. Applicant stated that she kept all of her creditors 
apprised of her financial situation during this period.9 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are the secondary and primary mortgages, respectively, for 
Applicant’s home, which was in foreclosure as of the date of the hearing. When they 
began falling behind on their primary mortgage payments for SOR ¶ 1.b in June 2012, 
Applicant stated that she and her husband believed they had loss of income protection 
for their mortgage accounts because they had received notifications from the creditor 
stating such. The creditor ultimately told them that income protection was not on their 
policy.10  
 
Applicant stated that on the creditor’s advice that their best option for SOR ¶ 1.b 
was to obtain a loan modification, and on the creditor’s assurance that the loan 
modification process would not take long, she and her husband stopped paying SOR ¶ 
1.b and began the loan modification process in June 2012. As of the date of the 
hearing, the loan modification process was ongoing. Applicant stated that they have 
gone through at least eight resubmissions of their loan modification paperwork, as the 
creditor has either lost the paperwork or repeatedly asked for additional documentation. 
She provided documentation to corroborate her testimony concerning their efforts to 
obtain a loan modification for SOR ¶ 1.b.11  
 
By December 2013, Applicant and her husband began falling behind on their 
secondary mortgage payments for SOR ¶ 1.a. When Applicant received the SOR, the 
loan modification process for SOR ¶ 1.b was still ongoing, and she and her husband 
were still in discussions with the creditor as to a resolution for both SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
To avoid falling further behind on SOR ¶ 1.a, they applied the money they would have 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 17-99; AEs G-H, LL. 
 
9 Tr. at 17-99; GE 1. 
 
10 Tr. at 17-99; GE 1; AEs L, X, Y, KK, LL. 
 
11 Tr. at 17-99; GE 1; AEs L, Y, KK, LL. 
 
 
5 
 
used for SOR ¶ 1.b to bring SOR ¶ 1.a current. Applicant provided documentation to 
show that SOR ¶ 1.a is current.12 
 
Applicant stated that they have been unable to sell their home without taking a 
substantial financial loss due to a loss of equity. When they purchased the home in late 
2007, the value of the home was $900,000. As of June 2017, the estimated value of the 
home was $708,000. If they are unable to get the loan modified for SOR ¶ 1.b, 
Applicant and her husband plan to discuss with the creditor their options for resolving 
their mortgage debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, to include an offer in compromise or a 
deed in lieu of foreclosure. They intend to resolve any remaining deficiency balance.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a credit card. When Applicant fell behind on this account, she made 
small payments as a showing of good faith. She successfully negotiated the delinquent 
balance to $6,273 prior to receiving the SOR, and she paid $522 monthly since 2016 to 
resolve the debt. She provided documentation to corroborate her testimony regarding 
her payment arrangement, and to show that she paid off the account as of March 
2017.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is the primary mortgage and SOR ¶ 1.g is the secondary mortgage for 
Applicant’s rental property. As with SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant and her husband sought a 
loan modification for SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g when they began falling behind on their 
payments in 2012. She stated that they were approved for a loan modification for SOR 
¶ 1.d in late 2014. She provided documentation to corroborate her testimony concerning 
her efforts to obtain a loan modification for SOR ¶ 1.d, to show that SOR ¶ 1.g has been 
current since at least July 2016, and to show that SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g are current as of 
July 2017. Applicant stated that they have had tenants in the rental property for the past 
three years who have timely paid their rent. While Applicant and her husband have also 
been unable to sell this property without taking a significant financial loss due to a loss 
of equity, it is their intent to sell it.15  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a department store charge account. Applicant stated that she 
started paying this debt before she received the SOR. She provided documentation to 
show that she paid it in July 2016.16 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a car loan. Applicant stated that she had been attempting to settle 
this debt before she received the SOR. She provided documentation to show that she 
paid this debt in April 2016.17 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 17-99; GE 1; AEs U, V, X, EE, LL. 
 
13 AEs U, KK, LL. 
 
14 GEs 1-2; AEs M, U, Z, EE. 
 
15 Tr. at 17-99; GEs 1-2; AEs N, P, AA, BB. 
 
16 Tr. at 17-99; AEs R, V. 
 
17 Tr. at 17-99; GEs 1-2; AEs O, HH, LL. 
 
6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h is a March 2015 lien entered against Applicant for delinquent state 
personal income taxes for tax period 2011. Applicant stated that when she and her 
husband received notification in 2015 concerning their delinquent taxes, she thought 
they had already set up a payment plan for the outstanding taxes, and she was 
unaware that a lien had been placed against them until she received the SOR. When 
she contacted the state tax office to set up another payment plan, she learned that the 
account they had previously set up for their initial payment plan was not auto deducting 
the payments. She also discussed with the state tax office the potential for resolving this 
lien through an offer in compromise, though Applicant understands that she has to be in 
the financial position to pay should she proceed that route. She stated that they have 
made timely payments towards this lien since March 2015, and they expect to have the 
lien resolved within six months. She provided documentation to show that they made 17 
payments of $250 from January 2016 to June 2017.18 
 
Applicant also incurred two delinquent debts that are not alleged in the SOR. The 
first debt involved a timeshare that Applicant and her husband purchased in 1999, that 
became delinquent for $25,000 between 2012 and 2016. Applicant provided 
documentation to show that they sold the timeshare back to the creditor in November 
2016, and the account was closed as of April 2016. The second debt involved $28,000 
in federal income taxes for tax periods 2009 through 2011. Applicant stated that after 
she and her husband filed their federal income tax returns for these tax periods, the IRS 
informed them that their returns were incorrect and they owed $28,000. Applicant stated 
that they made a payment arrangement with the IRS of $587 monthly, and she provided 
documentation to show that they made 19 payments of $587 from January 2017 to June 
2017. She also stated that they have timely filed all subsequent federal income tax 
returns, any tax refunds have been intercepted and applied towards their outstanding 
federal taxes, and they do not have any other outstanding federal taxes.19 
 
Applicant does not have any other delinquent debts. She and her husband 
received financial counseling in July 2016. They developed and have used a budget to 
resolve their debts, and they intend to continue to do so. They have the financial means 
to continue resolving SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.h, as well as their outstanding federal taxes. In 
addition to Applicant’s longstanding career in the military, she is extensively involved in 
and has received numerous awards for her contributions to her community.20 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
18 Tr. at 17-99; GE 2; AEs Q, CC, DD, EE, FF, GG.  
 
19 Tr. at 17-99; GE 2; AEs U, II, JJ. 
 
20 Tr. at 17-99; GEs 1-5; AEs A-LL. 
 
7 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a 
possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol 
 
8 
 
abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater 
risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate 
funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay her debts, to include her state income taxes for tax 
period 2011. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely  
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the  
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 
9 
 
 Since Applicant’s financial problems started in June 2012, Applicant received 
financial counseling, developed a budget, and has made a good-faith effort to resolve 
her delinquent debts. She resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c to 1.g. She stated that she has 
had a payment arrangement of $250 monthly since March 2015 for SOR ¶ 1.h, and 
provided documentation to show that she made 17 payments of $250 from January 
2016 to June 2017. She intends to continue paying SOR ¶ 1.h in accordance with this 
arrangement.  
 
 Applicant stated that she has been pursuing a loan modification for SOR ¶ 1.b 
since June 2012, at the creditor’s advice that it was her best option for resolving it, and 
with the creditor’s assurance that the process would not take long. She provided 
documentation to corroborate her testimony concerning her lengthy efforts to obtain a 
loan modification for SOR ¶ 1.b. She intends to continue working with the creditor to 
achieve a loan modification for SOR ¶ 1.b. If unsuccessful, she will work with the 
creditor to discuss options for resolving it as well as the related secondary mortgage 
account in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant intends to resolve any deficiency balance for SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b should there be one.  
 
 While not alleged in the SOR, Applicant resolved a delinquent timeshare debt in 
November 2016 and has been on a payment plan of $587 monthly to resolve $28,000 in 
federal income taxes for tax periods 2009 through 2011. She provided documentation to 
show that she and her husband made 19 payments of $587 from January 2017 to June 
2017, and she also stated that they have timely filed all subsequent federal income tax 
returns, any tax refunds have been intercepted and applied towards their outstanding 
federal taxes, and they do not have any other outstanding federal taxes. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Applicant has not incurred additional delinquent debts. While Applicant has unresolved 
SOR debts, and one unresolved non-SOR debt, she has demonstrated a good-faith 
effort and has the means to continue to resolve her remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 
20(d) and 20(g) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 20 years 
of honorable military service. While Applicant has unresolved SOR debts and an 
unresolved non-SOR debt, Applicant credibly testified at hearing and there is sufficient 
evidence to show that she is committed to resolving them.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
