1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No: 15-08624 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
August 10, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant resolved one debt to the satisfaction of the creditor, and brought 
another debt current. He contested two other debts. However, he failed to introduce 
documentation to show his state tax debt is adequately being addressed. His history of 
financial delinquencies remains a concern. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of Case 
On November 21, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 22, 2016, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On September 19, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on September 20, 2016, and received by him on September 26, 
2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. His response was due October 26, 2016. 
DOHA assigned the case to me on August 2, 2017. Items 1 through 7 are admitted into 
evidence.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance. My decision would be the 
same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new 
AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is divorced, since 2001, and has two children. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 2003. He has worked for his employer since June 2015. 
He was unemployed from January 2009 through February 2009, and September 2014 
to November 2014. He served on active duty in the Marine Corps from 1987 through 
1991. He received an honorable discharge. (Item 2.) 
 
 As alleged in the SOR, Applicant was delinquent on five debts, with a total 
amount of $22,702, and filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007 that was discharged in 
September 2009. Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. He denied 
the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. His debts are identified in the credit 
reports entered into evidence. (Answer; Item 5; Item 6.) After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $1,028, as 
stated in SOR ¶ 1.a. This debt is for an automobile loan. (Item 2.) Applicant explained in 
his answer that he had “fallen behind in the monthly payments due to [the] loss of [his] 
job however, the amount of $1,082.57 was paid on December, 2015, to bring the car 
 
 
3 
 
 
loan current.” He presented a credit report dated July 5, 2016, which reflected this debt 
as “pays as agreed.” This delinquency is resolved. 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $10,386, as 
stated in SOR ¶ 1.b. This debt was for a vehicle he purchased in 2010. (Item 5.) He 
“voluntarily returned” the vehicle “because [he] could no longer afford to maintain the 
monthly payments along with keeping current with [his] child support payments and 
[repay] other family debt that was incurred during [his] marriage.” He claimed that 
account “erroneously shows on my credit report as a charge off when in fact [creditor] 
received the collateral back.” (Item 2; Item 3 at 48.) He sent this creditor a letter on 
August 22, 2016, contesting the entry on his credit report.  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $2,176, as 
stated in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant claimed that this debt “is for dental expenses for my son 
who bares [sic] the same name as I do.” (Item 2.) He sent this creditor a letter on 
August 22, 2016, contesting this debt.  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $1,435, as 
stated in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt was owed for child support arrears. Applicant attributed 
his past arrearages to his unemployment. He had to go to court to get the payments 
adjusted after he lost his job because his ex-wife would not work with him. Applicant 
produced documentation that he is current on this account. This delinquency is 
resolved. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a state tax debt in the amount of $7,677, 
as stated in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant admitted that a state tax lien had been entered 
against him in December 2012. He explained, “As a casualty of [his] divorce, [he] 
absorbed a joint tax liability. [He is] current on a payment plan and [has] paid $2,300 to 
date toward this liability.” (Item 2.) He attached a copy of a cancelled check, dated May 
27, 2016, as proof of this payment. He explained on his SF-86 that this debt was 
incurred because his ex-wife claimed their daughter as a dependent on her taxes 
without his knowledge, causing him to owe taxes. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 5.) Applicant’s 
credit report dated July 5, 2016, reflects an additional state tax lien in the amount of 
$8,617 filed July 2014. The cancelled check in Item 2 does not indicate to which tax 
debt the $2,300 payment was to be applied. 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in August 2007. Applicant indicated the 
total debt involved in the bankruptcy was $420,430. He identified assets totaling 
$430,450. (Item 3 at 43; Item 7.) He explained: 
 
This was a result of the loss of employment and [divorce] where I was 
[responsible] for all the debt as my ex-wife left me with all the bills and did 
not work for 4 years throughout our separation and eventual divorce, 
which caused undue hardship on me along with the child support 
payments I was hit with. (Item 3 at 44.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
His Chapter 13 bankruptcy was converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and a final decree 
of discharge of liability was entered in 2009. (Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
 The credit report, dated July 5, 2016, reflected Applicant was indebted on an 
additional collection account in the amount of $220. (Item 2.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was delinquent on five debts, in a total of $22,702; and filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2007, which was converted to a Chapter 7 and discharged in 2009. These 
facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift 
the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
financial problems have been ongoing since at least 2007, despite the discharge of a 
substantial amount of debt in 2009. His 2016 credit report reflects an additional 
delinquency and a second unresolved state tax lien. He has not demonstrated that 
future financial problems are unlikely. 
 
The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s 
financial problems are related to his divorce and periods of unemployment, which were 
circumstances beyond his control. He acted reasonable and responsibly in repaying his 
automobile loan delinquency (SOR ¶ 1.a); contesting two debts in writing with the 
creditors (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c); and resolving his child support arrearage (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
However, he did not provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances with respect to his tax lien, which is necessary for full mitigation under 
this condition. While he documented one $2,300 payment to his state in May 2016, that 
payment does not resolve the debt in full or document toward which tax lien the 
payment was to be credited.  
 
Applicant presented no documentation of recent financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) 
has not been established. 
 
Applicant established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d), as he presented 
documentation that he made good-faith efforts to address the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.d through payments. At this time, he has not established a history of 
 
 
7 
 
 
responsible action with respect to his state tax debt. There is no evidence of a good-
faith effort to repay that debt in the record, other than a single $2,300 payment.  
 
Applicant established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e), as he presented two 
letters to the creditors in which he disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.  
 
Applicant failed to produce evidence to support a finding that he made 
arrangements with the state tax authority to pay the amount owed and is in compliance 
with those arrangements. While the $2,300 payment represents a sizable amount, that 
one-time payment does not show that he has an arrangement with the state to pay his 
tax debt or is current on an agreement to repay the debt. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(g) 
has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
and his financial issues appear to be related to his divorce and brief periods of 
unemployment. However, the likelihood that financial problems will recur is substantial; 
and Applicant failed to demonstrate that the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress 
is reduced or eliminated. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He has not met 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
__________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
