 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-05091 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 7, 
2014. On February 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 6, 2017, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations in a one-page statement. Attached was a letter from the collection agent for 
Navient confirming that Applicant telephonically authorized a one-time payment from his 
debit card in the amount of $250 on June 28, 2016. The stated balance on the Navient 
account (student loans) was $72,078, which is the aggregate total of the delinquent 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. Applicant also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2017. On May 19, 2017, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for June 21, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted no documents. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2017. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
moved to amend the SOR ¶ 1.c by deleting the digit “4” at the end of the stated amount. 
So, it now alleges a charged-off correct amount of “$22,309”. Applicant did not object. 
This motion was granted. It did not alter Applicant’s admission of this allegation. I 
granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until July 11, 2017, so that he 
could provide substantiating documentation.2 He declined to do so.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He graduated from high school in 2004, and obtained 
an associate’s degree in 2009. Applicant has been employed as a dietary aid at a 
rehabilitation facility since December 2010. He has been pending a job with a federal 
contractor, contingent on obtaining a security clearance, since September 2014.  
Applicant was married in September 2013, separated in May 2014, and divorced in 
December 2014. He reported no children. He also reported no military service and no 
previous security clearance. He disclosed the three delinquent-student-loan debts in 
section 26 of his September 2014 SCA, and explained that he fell behind on payments 
due to his pending divorce and moving. He also claimed to have set up a payment plan 
with the creditor in September 2014, but provided no documentation to show payments 
in accordance with a plan. 
 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
2 Tr. at 39. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s September 7, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and the summaries of his two security clearance interviews on 
January 29, 2015 and February 19, 2015.  
 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR alleged three delinquent debts totaling approximately $72,000 for 
student loans that Applicant obtained to attend college. Applicant admitted to these 
charged-off debts in his Answer to the SOR. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he 
could not find a job out of college.4 All of the three charged-off debts were for student 
loans that he consolidated for intended payments of $300 each month.5 He claims to 
have made payments pursuant to this plan for a year.6 However, he stopped making 
payments when he ran into marital difficulties, which ended in divorce. Applicant 
testified that a different collection agency took over the consolidated accounts in April 
2015, and he was paying approximately 20% of his salary each month with the intention 
to pay the student loans off in full.7 However, during the turbulence surrounding his 
divorce proceedings and his move back in with his parents, Applicant lost the paperwork 
and documents to demonstrate that he actually made payments on the plan.  
 
 Applicant needs a security clearance for his anticipated job. Applicant’s monthly 
take-home pay is $250 - $300 a week currently.8 He admits that he defaulted on his 
payment plan to try to resolve the charged-off student loans.9 He pays his parents $40 a 
week to live in their home and he has an automobile monthly payment of $350 plus 
other incidental expenses for phone, groceries, gas etc.10 Applicant testified that he 
could obtain his bank records to show that he made payments for approximately a year 
on the student loans, but he has not done so. He provided no evidence of financial 
counseling or debt consolidation services. Further, he provided no character references, 
performance evaluations or evidence of community service and civic involvement.  
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 24. 
 
5 Tr. at 24-26. 
 
6 Tr. at 40. 
 
7 Tr. at 29. 
 
8 Tr. at 31. 
 
9 Tr. at 30. 
 
10 Tr. at 32. 
 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
5 
 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.11 Applicant has not met that burden.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
                                                          
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 Applicant was separated and divorced in 2014. Since then, he has been 
employed earning hourly wages as a dietary aid. To some extent, these conditions were 
beyond his control. However, he has not produced relevant and responsive 
documentation, demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant has not met his burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial 
problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur. He claims to have made previous payments to the 
creditor pursuant to a plan, but produced no substantiating documents beyond the one 
telephone authorization for a $250 debit in June 2016, that was attached to his Answer 
to the SOR. The charged-off debts have not been resolved. The mitigating conditions 
enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
 
7 
 
 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
