 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-05023 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 18, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant is indebted to ten creditors in the approximate amount of $12,854. He 
failed to produce documentation to show he resolved any of his delinquencies to the 
satisfaction of his creditors. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 24, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On December 31, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2016. (Item 1.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On July 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on July 29, 2016, and received by him on August 9, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the 30 days allotted, which ended 
September 8, 2016. DOHA assigned the case to me on August 2, 2017. Items 1 through 
4 are admitted into evidence.1  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married. He has worked for his current employer, a 
government contractor, since October 2014. He served in the Marine Corps from 2001 
to 2005, and in the Army from 2005 to 2013. He received a general discharge under 
honorable conditions as a result of a driving under the influence conviction. He was 
unemployed from April 2013 to September 2013. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to ten creditors in the approximate amount 
of $12,854. Applicant admitted to the debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.j. He 
noted “some have been resolved due to credit repair.” All of Applicant’s debts appear in 
the credit report dated November 13, 2014. (Item 4.) Applicant attributed his 
delinquencies to his unemployment after his discharge from the Army and his wife’s lay-
off in December 2014. (Item 3.) 
 
                                                 
1 Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM or affirmatively waive any objection to Item 3, I will 
consider only those facts in Item 3 that are not adverse to Applicant unless they are also contained in 
other evidence or included in the admissions in his answer to the SOR. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $429, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a. This credit card account was opened in April 2013. It was charged off by 
the creditor in November 2014. Applicant stated that he intended to contact this creditor, 
but failed to produce any documentation to show he took any actions to resolve this 
debt. (Item 3.) It remains unresolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $800, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b. This medical account was opened in August 2014. He believed that the 
debt should have been covered by the Department of Veterans Affairs, however, he 
failed to produce any documentation to support his claim. It was reported as delinquent 
in October 2014 and appears in the 2016 credit report. It remains unresolved. (Item 3; 
Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $5,060, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This credit card account was opened in April 2011. It became 
delinquent in 2013. It was charged off by the creditor in October 2014. Applicant stated 
that he intended to contact this creditor, but failed to produce any documentation to 
show he took any actions to resolve this debt. (Item 3.) It remains unresolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $416, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d. This “noteloan” account was opened in April 2012. It became delinquent 
in 2013 and was charged off by the creditor in October 2014. Applicant claimed that his 
wife paid this debt. However, he failed to produce documentation to support his claim. It 
remains unresolved. (Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $458, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt became delinquent in June 2014. Applicant claimed that this 
debt was paid. However, he failed to produce documentation to support his claim. It 
remains unresolved. (Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $3,793, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. This automobile loan was opened in January 2013. It was reported 
delinquent in October 2013. Applicant claimed that the vehicle was repossessed and 
sold for more than he owed on this account. However, he failed to produce 
documentation to substantiate his claim. It has been charged off by the creditor and 
remains unresolved. (Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $150, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g. This account was opened in January 2008. It has been delinquent since 
August 2008. It is unresolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $569, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.h. This account was opened in February 2008. It became delinquent in 
September 2014. It is unresolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $936, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt was for a telephone service account opened in August 2014. It 
became delinquent in October 2014. Applicant’s credit report reflects that he disputed 
this information, but nothing further in that regard. It remains unresolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $243, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.j. This debt was for a “joint contractual liability” that has been delinquent 
since October 2014. It is unresolved. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15, states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant is indebted to ten creditors in the approximate amount of $12,854. He 
has documented no action to resolve these delinquencies. The facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s SOR-
alleged financial problems have been ongoing since 2013, are unresolved, and continue 
to date. 
 
The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Both Applicant’s 
and his wife’s unemployment were conditions beyond their control. However, he did not 
provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to his 
debts, which is necessary for full mitigation under this condition. He has been fully 
employed since October 2014, yet he has not documented steps taken to resolve his 
SOR-listed delinquencies. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable. 
 
Applicant has not established a history of responsible action with respect to his 
delinquent debts. There is no discernable evidence of a good-faith effort to repay those 
debts in the record. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his financial 
difficulties. He failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or 
permanent behavioral change, concerning his continuing pattern of financial 
irresponsibility. His ongoing delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, 
coercion, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that he did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
