KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not satisfied
the mitigating conditions. Among other things, relying upon an option such as bankruptcy is not
the same as actually paying debts when due. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-06707.a1
DATE: 08/15/2017
DATE: August 15, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06707
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Andre F. Regard, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 26, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 30, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  He has held a security clearance since 2006.  He
also works at a part-time job to earn extra money.  Applicant’s wife had surgery in 2006, resulting
in her inability to work.  This decreased the family income.  Applicant’s wife was required to repay
the state $10,000 for an apparent unemployment compensation overpayment.  This debt has been
resolved.  Applicant has spent funds for travel, equipment, etc., in support of his children’s athletic
activities.  In late 2003, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, which was
subsequently converted to Chapter 7.  He was discharged in bankruptcy in early 2005.  Applicant
filed again for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in late 2016 and is making weekly payments of $111 to the
bankruptcy trustee.  He refers to this as his repayment plan.
Applicant’s SOR lists a number of delinquent debts, for utility services, medical expenses,
automobile loans, cable television, etc.  Applicant demonstrated that he had resolved some of these
debts, and others were included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan.  This plan also includes debts
not listed in the SOR.
In addition, Applicant’s SOR alleges that he failed to file his Federal and state income tax
returns from 2007 to 2012.  He owes the Federal Government over $20,000, and he began an
installment plan in January 2013.  He did not produce a copy of this exhibit.  In addition, he owes
his state about $600 for unpaid taxes, which he claims that he paid in 2015.  Applicant believed that
when he filed Federal returns his state returns were filed automatically.  “He has now learned that
he has to file tax returns with the IRS and his home state tax authorities separately.”  Decision at 4.
Applicant enrolled in a credit counseling program, but he discontinued it when he decided
to file for bankruptcy.  He received counseling as part of his bankruptcy proceeding.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved some of Applicant’s debts in his favor, as he also did with one of the
Guideline E allegations.  However, he also entered adverse findings under both Guidelines. 
Regarding Applicant’s finances, the Judge concluded that the problems were not under control.  He
stated that Applicant did not demonstrate a good-faith effort to pay his debts, relying instead upon
bankruptcy.  He also cited to Applicant’s ongoing tax debt.  Applicant’s failure to have filed his tax
returns was cross alleged under Guideline E, for which the Judge found no mitigation.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly apply the mitigating conditions.  He cites
to each of the SOR debts, arguing that some had been paid and that others, including Applicant’s
delinquent tax obligations, were covered by the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan.  He also states that
Applicant has filed his tax returns.  Some of the matters addressed in the Appeal Brief are from
outside the record.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the evidence in the record.  Neither are they enough to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
13-00502 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2017).  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s conclusion that
Applicant had not satisfied the mitigating conditions.  Among other things, relying upon an option
such as bankruptcy is not the same as actually paying debts when due.  See ISCR Case No.12-01664
at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 17, 2014).  Moreover, failure to file tax returns and pay tax obligations suggests
that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-established government rules and
regulations.  Voluntary compliance with such rules and regulations is essential for protecting
classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael  Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
