 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-04605  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
August 14, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 30, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On March 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2016. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  (Item 1.) On 
July 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six items, and was 
received by him on August 9, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on 
July 11, 2017. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence.  The Government’s items 
will now be referred to as Government Exhibits.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old and married.  He has a Bachelor’s degree.  He holds 
the position of Communications Manager for a defense contractor.  He is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance in connection with is employment.  (Government Exhibit 3.)   
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the United States Air Force from November 
1992 to May 2008, when he was honorably discharged.  There was a short gap in his 
services from September 2002 to May 2003 when he was a student at a University and 
participated in the ROTC Air Force program.  Applicant began working for his current 
employer in May 2008.  (Government Exhibit 3.)   
 
 Applicant has two delinquent debts totaling approximately $21,000.  He admits 
both debts.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent credit card account that 
was charged off in the approximate amount of $18,294.  He is also indebted to a 
creditor for a delinquent department store credit card account that was charged off in 
the approximate amount of $3,227.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR)  
 
 Applicant explained that in April 2011, he experienced financial setbacks when 
his home was flooded and destroyed because of a tropical storm.  His family lost nearly 
everything.  In November of that same year, his wife lost her job.  These events 
occurring so close in time and caused the Applicant serious financial strain. Although 
Applicant had flood insurance coverage, it took a long time to be compensated, as 
many others in his area had experienced losses and had also filed claims.  While 
waiting to be compensated, Applicant used two of his credit cards to cover the costs 
 
 
3 
 
 
and expenses as he tried to rebuild his home and the lives of his family.  Applicant 
contends that he has set up payment plans with both creditors and payments are taken 
out of his checking account each month.  He submits that he has not missed one 
payment, and the balances on the accounts have been reduced.  Applicant also adds 
that he has more than $150,000 in two investment portfolios through his employer that 
he could use to pay off his outstanding debts if necessary.  Applicant has failed to 
provide any documentary evidence to substantiate any payment agreements he has 
made or payments he is or has been making toward the debts.  (Applicant’s Answer to 
SOR.)    
  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
 
4 
 
 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
Two of Applicant’s credit card accounts totaling approximately $21,000 remains 
outstanding.  There is no documentary evidence in the record to show that Applicant 
has or is paying the debts.  These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
Devastation from the storm that flooded Applicant’s home, and his wife’s loss of 
employment were obviously unforeseen difficult circumstances that were completely 
beyond his control.  These unexpected events caused financial difficulties.  Hopefully 
these circumstances will not recur.  However, Applicant claims that he has set up a 
payment plan that he is following to resolve the delinquent credit card debts listed in the 
SOR.  He has failed to submit any documentation to substantiate this.  Mere claims of 
payment by Applicant are not enough to carry his burden of proof.  There are no clear 
indications that his financial issues are under control. The record does not establish 
clear mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b) 
and 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who states that he took reasonable and effective action to resolve the delinquent debts 
listed in the SOR.  Why he failed to submit documentation to support his contention is a 
mystery.  The likelihood that financial problems of this sort will recur the same way is 
minimal; however, without more in the record, specifically what he has paid and what he 
still owes, it is impossible to determine whether he is now in control of his finances.    
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, 
and suitability for a security clearance. He has not met his burden to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
