 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03553 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 31, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2015, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 26, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 
14, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on November 14, 2016, scheduling the hearing for November 22, 2016. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
presented 11 documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through K. The 
record was left open until January 23, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. On 
January 18, 2017, Applicant offered AppX L, which was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on November 30, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a.~1.j., and 1.o. He denied 
SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.k.~1.n. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5 and 
TR at page 54 line 17 to page 55 line 16.) He has been employed with the defense 
contractor since December of 2012. (Id.) Applicant served in the U.S. Navy “for 14 
years,” and is on “40 percent” Veterans Administration Disability. (TR at page 28 lines 
4~11, and AppX L at page 9.) He has held a security clearance while serving in the 
Navy. He is married, and has five children. (TR at page 26 lines 10~23.) 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributes much of his admitted past-due indebtedness to his four 
months of unemployment from August 2012 to December of 2012, when he left active 
duty and obtained his present employment; to his wife losing “her employment in 2013; 
and to unforeseen medical bills. (TR at page 30 line 16 to page 31 line 7, GX 1 at pages 
12~13. 
 
 1.a.~1.d., and 1.f.~1.h. These are the past-due medical bills totaling about 
$3,015. Prior to Applicant’s wife losing her employment in 2013, these co-pay medical 
costs used to be covered by his wife’s medical insurance. (TR at page 32 line 10 to 
page 35 line 22, at page 38 line 2 to page 39 line 25, and at page 40 lines 12~24.) 
Through the auspices of a credit consolidation service (CCS), Applicant is making 
monthly payments of $75 towards these medical debts, and the debt to be discussed 
under ¶ 1.e., as evidenced by documentation from his CCS and his credit union. (Id., 
and AppXs E and L at page 2.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to 
address these past-due debts. 
 
 1.e. This is a past-due debt to a jeweler, for the purchase of his “wife’s wedding 
ring,” in the amount of about $2,439. (TR at page 35 line 23 to page 38 line 1.) The 
original purchase price was $5,000. (Id.) Through the auspices of his CCS, Applicant is 
making monthly payments of $75 towards this debt, and the before mentioned medical 
debts, as evidenced by documentation from his CCS and his credit union. (TR at page 
35 line 23 to page 38 line 1, and AppXs E and L at page 2.) I find that Applicant is 
making a good-faith effort to address this past-due debt. 
 
 
3 
 
 1.i. Through monthly payments of $60, “this [$1,127] account was satisfied on 
10-28-2016,” as evidenced by documentation from this creditor. (TR at page 40 line 25 
to page 42 line 3, AppX F, and AppX L at page 3.) 
 
 1.j. This $58 debt was satisfied “02/26/2016,” as evidenced by documentation 
from this creditor. (TR at page 43 lines 3~9, and AppX D.) 
 
 1.k. Applicant denies this alleged past-due debt for about $4,259, and it does not 
appear on the Government’s last three credit reports accessed in March of 2015, 
October of 2015, and most recently in November of 2016. (TR at page 42 line 10 to 
page 45 line 22, and GXs 3~5.) I find that Applicant does not owe this alleged past-due 
debt. 
 
 1.l. Applicant denies this alleged past-due debt for about $329, and it does not 
appear on the Government’s last three credit reports accessed in March of 2015, 
October of 2015, and most recently in November of 2016. (TR at page 46 line 4 to page 
47 line 11, and GXs 3~5.) I find that Applicant does not owe this alleged past-due debt. 
 
 1.m. This $277 debt “has been PAID in full,” as of “November 16, 2016,” as 
evidenced by documentation from this creditor’s “Collection Agency.” (TR at page 47 
lines 12~24, and AppX B.) 
 
 1.n. This $192 debt ”was paid . . . on December 09, 2013,” as evidenced by 
documentation from this creditor. (TR at page 47 line 25 to page 48 line 8, and AppX C.) 
 
 1.o. Applicant is making monthly payments towards this $460 medical account, 
as evidenced by documentation from this creditor. (TR at page 48 lines 9~24, and AppX 
L at page 4.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this debt.  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant had significant past-due indebtedness. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has addressed all of his admitted past-due indebtedness. The two 
debts he contests, ¶¶ 1.k. and 1.l., do not appear on the Government’s last three credit 
reports, which gives credence to his averment that they are not owed. Now that he is 
employed, Applicant has demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a)~20(e) has been established. 
 
  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working in the defense industry and is 
highly respected in the work place. (AppX A, and AppX L at pages 5~8.) He performs 
well at his job. (Id.)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.o:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
