1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
           --------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-08515 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hymans, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
problematic financial history and his personal conduct. Accordingly, this case is decided 
against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on August 20, 2014. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On April 1, 2016, after reviewing the application and the information 
gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility 
for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint in a civil court 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
2 
 
case. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as 
Guideline F for financial considerations and Guideline E for personal conduct. Applicant 
answered the SOR on July 20, 2016, and requested a decision based on the written 
record without a hearing.   
 
On August 16, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on August 23, 2016. He was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on August 31, 2016.3 Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were seven items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 4.4 Exhibits 1, 3, and 4 are admitted into evidence. Exhibit 
2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place 
during the December 2014 background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated, as 
required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department Counsel’s written brief includes a 
footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to 
object may constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement. Nevertheless, I am not 
persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, which response is 
optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of the authentication requirement. 
The record does not demonstrate that Applicant understood the concepts of 
authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood 
the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 
2 is inadmissible, and I have not considered the information in the ROI.    
 
 
 
                                                          
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 23, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated August 31, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 
30 days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 The first three items in the FORM are the SOR, the SOR transmittal letter, and Applicant’s Answer, 
respectively. Because the SOR, the SOR transmittal letter, and the Answer are the pleadings in this case, 
they are not marked as Exhibits. Items 4 through 7 are marked as Exhibits 1 through 4.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old, divorced with no children. Since January 2012, he has 
worked for a defense contractor.6 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant (1) failed to file state and federal 
income tax returns for 2010 through 2013, and (2) has six delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $6,805. Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose those debts in his security clearance application. Applicant admitted all 
allegations in the SOR.7   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.8 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”9 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.10 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.11 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.12 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.13 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 1.  
 
7 Applicant submitted no extenuating documents with his answer to the SOR, and as noted, he did not 
respond to the FORM.  
 
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
9 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
10 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
11 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
13 Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
4 
 
facts that have been admitted or proven.14 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.15 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.16 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17 
 
     Discussion 
  
Guideline F  -  Financial Considerations  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,18 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.19 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
                                                          
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
18 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
19 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 19(f) failure to file…annual Federal [or] state income tax return as 
required; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;   
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and,  
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
 
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a problematic financial 
history and has failed to file federal and state income tax returns, as alleged.20  This raises 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), (b), (c) and (f).   
 
The next inquiry is whether any potentially mitigating conditions apply. After a 
careful review of the record, I find that none of the potentially mitigating conditions cited 
above apply in this case. 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct  
 
 In assessing an allegation of deliberate falsification, I consider not only the 
allegation and applicant’s answer but all relevant circumstances.21 Under Guideline E for 
                                                          
20 Facts admitted by an applicant in an answer to a SOR require no further proof by the Government. ISCR 
Case No. 94-1159 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 1995) (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR allegations 
. . . relieve Department Counsel of its burden of proof”); ISCR Case No. 94-0569 at 4 and n.1 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 30, 1995) (“[a]n applicant’s admissions, whether testimonial or written, can provide a legal basis for 
an Administrative Judge’s findings”). 
 
21 AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (d)(1)-(9) (explaining the “whole-person” concept and factors).  
 
6 
 
personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.”22 A statement is false or dishonest when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate 
if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, reasonably did not know the information, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
 In this case, the SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his security clearance 
application by deliberately failing to disclose the indebtedness alleged under Guideline F. 
Applicant answered, “I admit,” to that allegation. His answer was not qualified or explained 
in any fashion. Applicant did not provide any additional circumstances for me to examine, 
and I am not aware of any. Therefore, in light of Applicant’s unqualified admission, the 
Government needs no further proof.23 The burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate any 
security concern.24 He has not carried that burden.  
 
  The record evidence on Applicant’s financial condition and his personal conduct 
raises doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a 
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or 
vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.25 Accordingly, I 
conclude that Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.26 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
22 AG ¶ 15.   
 
23 See note 20, supra.  
 
24 ISCR Case No. 94-0966 at 4, n. 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 21, 1995). 
 
25 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
 
26 In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines were issued on December 10, 2016, and became 
effective on June 8, 2017. My Decision and Formal Findings under the revised Guidelines F and E would 
not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.  
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:                   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E       Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.                Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
  
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
