1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No. 15-08863 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
August 18, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant remains indebted to a creditor on a vehicle loan she co-signed for her 
daughter in the approximate amount of $2,183. Additionally, she failed to file Federal 
and state income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2013. She failed to produce 
documentation to show she resolved the vehicle loan or delinquent tax returns. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
Statement of Case 
On May 4, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2016. (Item 2.) She requested that her 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) On August 24, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on August 24, 2016, and received by her on August 29, 2016. 
The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the 30 days allotted, which ended 
September 28, 2016. DOHA assigned the case to me on August 2, 2017. Items 1 
through 5 are admitted into evidence.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, 
effective June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is 
issued pursuant to the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. She has worked for her current employer, a 
government contractor, since 2004. She divorced in 2000, and has three adult children. 
(Item 3.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant is indebted to a creditor on a delinquent vehicle 
loan that she co-signed for her daughter in the approximate amount of $21,296. 
Additionally, she was alleged to have failed to file her Federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2008 through 2013. (Item 1.) Applicant failed to specifically admit 
or deny any of the three allegations in the SOR, but instead offered explanations. As a 
result, she is deemed to have denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. (Item 2.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was indebted on a charged off account in the 
approximate amount of $21,296 in SOR ¶ 1.a. In her Answer, Applicant explained, “This 
was for a car loan that [she] cosigned for [her] daughter. The car was repossessed.” 
(Item 2.) She claimed that she paid off this debt in 2015, but provided no documentation 
to substantiate her claim. Her credit report, dated May 16, 2016, reflects this debt as a 
charged-off account. It shows the last payment was made in May 2015 and states that 
$2,183 is still past-due. This debt is unresolved. (Item 4, line 2.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file Federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2008 through 2013 in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. She disclosed her failure to file 
these tax returns in her SF-86. She explained that in 2008, she withdrew money from 
her 401K to pay debts and incurred an unexpected tax liability as a result of that 
withdrawal. She then “continued [her] mistakes by procrastinating on fixing the issue.” 
(Item 3.) In her Answer, she claimed to have filed all of her delinquent Federal and state 
tax returns “on 9/17/2015.” (Item 2.) However, she failed to provide documentation to 
support her claim. 
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze her current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character since she elected to have her 
case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15, states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of E O 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations  
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant remains indebted on the vehicle loan in the amount of $2,183. Further, 
she failed to file Federal and state income tax returns as required by law for tax years 
2008 through 2013. The facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s SOR-
alleged financial problems have been ongoing since 2009 when she failed to file her 
2008 state and Federal tax returns, are unresolved, and continue to date. 
 
Applicant failed to present evidence to demonstrate her debts and delinquent tax 
returns were due to circumstances beyond her control. Further, she did not provide 
evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to her 
obligations to file Federal and state income tax returns annually, which is necessary for 
full mitigation under this condition. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
 
Applicant has not established a history of responsible action with respect to her 
delinquent debt or filing her Federal and state income tax returns. While she appears to 
have repaid $20,000 of the delinquent vehicle loan, absent other evidence, $2,183 
remains outstanding. There is no discernable evidence of a good-faith effort to repay 
that debt since 2015 in the record. Further, there is no documentation establishing any 
efforts to resolve the delinquent state and Federal income tax filings. The evidence does 
not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant indicated that she filed her delinquent tax returns. However, she failed 
to present documentation to support her claim. As a general rule, "[f]ailure to file tax 
returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-established 
governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is 
essential for protecting classified information." (ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 25, 2016).) The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to her financial 
difficulties. She admitted she procrastinated and failed to file state and Federal income 
tax returns as required by law. She failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current 
good judgment, or permanent behavioral change, concerning her continuing pattern of 
financial irresponsibility. Her delinquent tax returns establish continuing potential for 
pressure, coercion, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that she did not meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
the financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
