 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01626 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence and financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On July 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated May 21, 2014). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR, as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated August 15, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on September 16, 2016, and he was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on 
September 22, 2016. Applicant’s response was due on October 22, 2016, but to date, no 
response has been received. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017.  
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Republic of the Philippines (Philippines) appearing in 
four U.S. Government publications which were identified, but only fragments of extracts 
of those publications were attached to the request. Facts are proper for administrative 
notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material 
to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on source information regarding the 
Philippines in publications of the U.S. Department of State.4  
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 201, 
Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,5 as set forth below 
under the Philippines subsection. 
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 Item 2 (Answer to the SOR, dated August 15, 2016). 
 
4 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices for 2014 - Philippines, undated; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country 
Information: Philippines, dated September 16, 2015; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Counterterrorism, East Asia 
and Pacific Overview, Country Reports on Terrorism, undated; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, 
Philippines Travel Warning, dated October 21, 2015. 
  
5 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts 
 
3 
                                      
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) and financial considerations 
(¶¶ 2.a. through 2.c.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been an 
overseas satellite technician and site lead with the company since September 2004. He 
is a June 1980 high school graduate. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in December 
1979, and he served on active duty until October 2004, at which time he was honorably 
retired as a technical sergeant (E-6). He was granted a top-secret security clearance in 
June 2009. Applicant was married in January 1982 and divorced in November 1992. He 
has one son from that marriage (born in 1985). Applicant remarried in May 2008. He has 
a daughter (born in November 2013) from his current marriage. His wife also has a son 
(born in January 2003).  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen whose parents and siblings are native-born 
U.S. citizens and residents. His son was born overseas while Applicant was stationed 
overseas, but he is a U.S. citizen as well, having also served in the U.S. military. 
Applicant’s wife was born in the Philippines of Philippine citizen-residents, and although 
she and Applicant are married, he is unable to have her permanently join him at his 
overseas military station until she is issued a Permanent Resident Card (Green Card). 
He is currently in the process of obtaining a “family-join visa” for his wife and children to 
join him at his overseas station, but it requires coordination from his sponsor company 
and the immigration office of the nation where he is located. His wife’s son (Applicant’s 
stepson) is a Philippine citizen-resident, and Applicant’s daughter is a dual U.S.-Philippine 
resident. Both children reside with their mother. His wife’s relationship with her parents is 
distant and strained, and she has not spoken with, or seen, them since 2010 or 2011. 
Applicant’s wife was an entertainer, but she now raises pigs and rents stalls for that 
purpose. Applicant sends her rent money. Applicant speaks with his wife several times 
per week by telephone, and because of their ages, he may speak with the children by 
telephone between weekly and monthly. Applicant’s wife has had no relationship with the 
Philippine government or its military or intelligence services. Likewise, there is no 
evidence that she has ever been approached or threatened by a terrorist or anyone 
affiliated with the Philippine government, its military, or intelligence services. Applicant 
                                                          
that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative 
information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing internet sources 
for numerous documents). In this instance, although Department Counsel has selected only certain pages of facts 
appearing in the identified publications, I have not limited myself to only those facts, but have considered the 
publications in their entirety. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
noted that he is “still a patriot and will defend our country no matter of the country [his] 
wife is from.” 
 
The Philippines 
 
 The Philippines is a multi-party constitutional republic with a bicameral legislature. 
The United States recognized the Philippines as an independent state and established 
relations in 1946. The United States has designated the Philippines as a major non-NATO 
ally, and there are close and abiding security ties between the two nations, based on 
strong historical and cultural links and a shared commitment to democracy and human 
rights. The Manila Declaration of 2011 reaffirmed the 1951 U.S.-Philippines Mutual 
Defense Treaty as the foundation for a robust, balanced, and responsive security 
partnership. The United States is among the Philippines’ top trading partners, and it 
traditionally has been the Philippines’ largest foreign investor. The United States and the 
Philippines have a bilateral trade and investment framework and a tax treaty. Philippine 
imports from the United States include raw and semi-processed materials for the 
manufacture of semiconductors, electronics and electrical machinery, transport 
equipment, cereals, and cereal preparations. Philippine national elections have been 
generally free and fair, but independent observers have noted widespread vote buying, 
and dynastic political families have monopolized elective offices at the national and local 
level. 
 
 The most significant human rights problems are extrajudicial killings, enforced 
disappearances undertaken by security forces and vigilante groups, a weak and 
overburdened criminal justice system, widespread official corruption and abuse of power, 
and impunity from prosecution for human rights abuses. Other human rights problems 
include prisoner and detainee torture and abuse by security forces, violence and 
harassment against human rights activists by security forces, warrantless arrests, lengthy 
pretrial detentions, poor prison conditions, killings and harassment of journalists, violence 
against women, abuse and sexual exploitation of children, and trafficking in persons. 
 
 Muslim separatists, communist insurgencies, and terrorist organizations are active 
in the Philippines: and they have killed Philippine security forces, local government 
officials, and other civilians. Through joint U.S. – Philippine cooperation, the ability of 
these various groups to operate in the Philippines has been constrained but not 
eliminated. Counterterrorism cooperation between the Philippines and the United States 
continued to improve in 2014. Terrorist groups were unable to conduct major attacks 
compared to previous years due to continuous pressure from Philippine counterterrorism 
and law enforcement efforts. Nevertheless, in 2014, there were numerous attacks with 
small arms and improvised explosive devices, kidnappings for ransom, and extortion 
efforts by suspected terrorist groups. Gangs of kidnappers have targeted foreigners, 
including Filipino-Americans. The U.S. State Department has recommended that all U.S. 
citizens defer non-essential travel to certain areas in the Philippines due to the high threat 
of kidnappings in those areas, and other violent activities of terrorist and insurgent groups. 
 
 The Philippine government has recognized the potential threat posed by 
radicalized Philippine citizens supporting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). 
 
5 
                                      
 
In July 2014, the Philippine president’s anti-terrorism council convened an ad hoc 
emergency technical working group focusing on persons of interest. The working group 
tightened passport issuance, increased immigration screening, and increased monitoring 
of ISIL-related activity. 
 
 There is no evidence to reflect that the Philippines engages in economic espionage 
or military intelligence activity directed toward the United States. 
 
Financial Considerations6 
 
 The SOR identified two delinquent debts totaling $447 that had been placed for 
collection, as reflected by his March 2015 credit report. In addition, there is an allegation 
that Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for the tax years 2004 through 
2013 as required. 
Applicant reported in his e-QIP that he had not filed his federal income tax returns 
for those tax years (SOR ¶ 2.a.) and that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had placed 
a lien on his home and bank accounts. He explained his situation to the IRS – that he was 
working overseas and had not yet returned to the United States permanently – and the 
IRS removed the tax lien. Applicant contended that the IRS indicated that he has two 
benefits while working overseas: (1) he is not required to file his income tax returns until 
he returns to the United States permanently, and then, he has two months thereafter to 
file his returns; and (2) there is an overseas tax exemption up to a certain amount. 
Although he had not yet returned to the United States, the IRS suggested that it might be 
in his best interest to file his returns as soon as possible.7 Applicant failed to submit 
documents to support his contentions that, according to the IRS, he is entitled to filing 
extensions as a taxpayer who is working overseas. 
There are two medical accounts with unpaid balances of $242 (SOR ¶ 2.b.) and 
$205 (SOR ¶ 2.c.) that were placed for collection. Applicant thought both charges had 
previously been paid, but he was apparently in error. On August 10, 2016, Applicant paid 
the creditor $448.53 to resolve both delinquencies.8 The accounts have been resolved. 
Applicant did not submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his net monthly 
income; monthly expenses; or any monthly remainder that might be available for 
discretionary spending or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence 
of any “financial” counseling in the traditional sense, but there is evidence that Applicant 
received guidance from the IRS with regard to the filing of his federal income tax returns. 
Nevertheless, there is also no evidence of any other delinquent accounts as Applicant 
                                                          
6 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 3, supra note 31; Item 2, supra note 3; Item 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 31, 2016); Item 4 
(Personal Subject Interview, dated January 31, 2016).  
 
7 Item 2, supra note 3. 
 
8 Transaction History, dated August 10, 2016, Attachment C to Applicant’s Response to the FORM; Equifax 
Credit Report Extracts, undated, Attachment B to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
has resolved his two minor previously delinquent accounts. While there remains some 
question in the mind of the Government as to his requirements for filing his federal income 
tax returns because he is overseas, given the anticipated income tax exemptions, there 
is no evidence of any other income tax deficiencies. It appears that Applicant’s finances 
are under control. 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”9 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”10   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”11 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
                                                          
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
10 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
11 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.12  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”13  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”14 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG 
¶ 6.  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s wife, young daughter, and teenage stepson reside in the Philippines. 
When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign 
country as well as each individual family member must be analyzed.15 If only one relative 
lives in a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone 
is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.16 The mere possession of close family ties with a 
person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. 
Moreover, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.17 
Furthermore, “even friendly countries can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.”18 
Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the 
economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue.19  
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. Feb. 
8, 2001). 
17 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004) (“The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.”). 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 00-00317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
In this instance, as noted above, there is no evidence to reflect that the Philippines 
engages in economic espionage or military intelligence activity directed toward the United 
States, but there is evidence of terrorist activities within areas of the country. The activities 
of those insurgent and terrorist groups, the risks of kidnappings by gangs, and the danger 
of radicalized ISIL sympathizers in the Philippines are sufficient to establish a “heightened 
risk” – a risk that is greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. Applicant’s ties to the United States run deep. He was 
born in the United States of native-born U.S. citizens, attended school in the United 
States, and was honorably retired from service with the U.S. Air Force.  He has held a 
top-secret security clearance since June 2009. His son served in the U.S. military. 
Applicant’s only relationship with the Philippines is through his wife, daughter, and 
stepson. He sends her rent money. He is currently in the process of obtaining a “family-
join visa” for his wife and children to join him at his overseas station, but it requires 
coordination from his sponsor company and the immigration office of the nation where he 
is located. Applicant’s wife has had no relationship with the Philippine government or its 
military or intelligence services. There is no evidence that she has ever been approached 
or threatened by a terrorist or anyone affiliated with the Philippine government, its military, 
or intelligence services. I am persuaded that Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is 
steadfast and undivided, and that he has “such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States, that [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant noted that he is “still a patriot and will defend our 
country no matter of the country [his] wife is from.” 
 
The Government has submitted facts regarding the presence of insurgent groups, 
terrorists, and radicalized ISIL sympathizers operating within the borders of the 
Philippines that might heighten the risk for Applicant’s wife, daughter, and stepson 
residing in the Philippines. In such a situation, the Philippines and all its citizens become 
potential victims of terrorism. Through joint U.S. – Philippine cooperation, the ability of 
 
10 
                                      
 
these various groups to operate in the Philippines has been constrained but not 
eliminated. Counterterrorism cooperation between the Philippines and the United States 
continued to improve in 2014. Terrorist groups were unable to conduct major attacks 
compared to previous years due to continuous pressure from Philippine counterterrorism 
and law enforcement efforts. The terrorism situation is not unlike the situations in other 
countries that have seen acts of terrorism – France, United Kingdom, Germany, and 
Belgium – and yet, the “heightened risk” in those countries is considered reduced. In fact, 
just as U.S. law enforcement and the DOD strives to protect U.S. citizens from terrorists, 
incidents such as those in Fort Hood, Texas; San Bernardino, California; New York City, 
New York; and Dallas, Texas, have not raised the banner of “heightened risk” over the 
United States to suggest that it is unsafe to have family members reside here. With 
relatively low profile family members (a wife who rents pig stalls, a young daughter, and 
a teenage stepson), there is a very low potential of forcing Applicant to choose between 
the interests of the United States and those of the Philippines, a terrorist organization, or 
those family members. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19: (a) “inability to satisfy debts;” (b) “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of 
the ability to do so;” (c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” (e) “consistent 
spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible spending, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, a history of late 
payments or of non-payment, or other negative financial indicators;” and (f) “failure to file 
or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay 
annual federal, state, or local income tax as required.”   
 
The federal income tax return filing deadline for Applicant while he is serving in his 
overseas station in support of U.S. military operations which have not been disclosed in 
this security clearance review process is as follows: 
 
11 
                                      
 
[Applicant’s filing deadline for filing his income tax return, paying his tax, 
claiming a refund, and taking other actions with the IRS is extended in two 
steps] is extended for 180 days after the later of the following. [First] The 
last day [he was] in a combat zone, [has] qualifying service outside of the 
combat zone, or serve[d] in a contingency operation (or the last day the area 
qualifies as a combat zone or the operation qualifies as a contingency 
operation). . . . Second, in addition to the 180 days, [his] deadline is 
extended by the number of days that were left for [him] to take the action 
with the IRS when [he] entered a combat zone (or began performing 
qualifying service outside the combat zone) or began serving in a 
contingency operation. If [he] entered the combat zone or began serving in 
the contingency operation before the period of time to take the action began, 
[his] deadline is extended by the entire period of time [he] ha[s] to take the 
action. For example, [if he] had 3 ½ months (January 1– April 18, 2016) to 
file [his] 2015 tax return. Any days of this 3 ½ month period that were left 
when [he] entered the combat zone (or the entire 3 ½ months if [he] entered 
the combat zone by January 1, 2016) are added to the 180 days when 
determining the last day allowed for filing [his] 2015 tax return. 
  
Example 1. Captain Margaret Jones, a resident of Maryland, entered Saudi 
Arabia on December 1, 2014. She remained there through March 31, 2016, 
when she departed for the United States. She was not injured and did not 
return to the combat zone. The deadlines for filing Captain Jones' 2014, 
2015, and 2016 returns are figured as follows.  
 
The 2014 tax return. The deadline is January 10, 2017. This deadline is 
285 days (180 plus 105) after Captain Jones' last day in the combat zone 
(March 31, 2016). The 105 additional days are the number of days in the 3 
½ month filing period that were left when she entered the combat zone 
(January 1 – April 15, 2015).20 
 
These extensions apply to civilians acting under the directions of U.S. Armed 
Forces in a combat zone.21 Applicant contended that he was exempt from the normal 
income tax return filing guidelines that are generally in force for civilians residing in the 
United States. The Government offered no evidence that he was not exempt from those 
guidelines. While Applicant failed to submit documentation from the IRS to confirm the 
information they furnished him, and he repeated, the fact that the IRS promptly withdrew 
and canceled the tax lien it had previously filed, gives substantial weight to his 
contentions. His two minor medical delinquencies, both of which he had overlooked and 
thought he had paid, without substantially more, fail to rise to the level of an inability to 
satisfy debts or an unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so. AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(b), 19(e), and 19(f) were not established. AG ¶ 19(c) is partially established. 
                                                          
20 See IRS Publication 3, Armed Forces Tax Guide, at p. 29 (2016), https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p3.pdf. 
 
21 See IRS Publication 3, Armed Forces Tax Guide, at p. 28 (2016), https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p3.pdf. 
See also IRS Extension of Deadlines – Combat Zone Service, Question and Answer 16, 
https://www.irs.gov/individuals/military/extension-of-deadlines-combat-zone-service. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: (a) “the behavior happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” (b) “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory 
lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;” 20(c) “the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;” (d) “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;”22 and (e) “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” 
 
I have concluded that AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) apply, and AG ¶ 20(c) partially 
applies. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(e) do not apply. Applicant had two minor delinquent 
accounts, totaling $448.53. Once he determined they were delinquent, he promptly paid 
them, and they were resolved. Those were the only delinquent accounts that Applicant 
had, and they were not the result of circumstances that were beyond his control. There is 
no evidence of any other financial delinquencies. Applicant’s situation with the IRS 
regarding the filing of his federal income tax returns arose under unusual circumstances. 
He spoke with an IRS representative and received guidance on his responsibilities with 
respect to the filing of his federal income tax returns while serving overseas. Applicant 
has a good employment history as well as a good financial history. Applicant continues 
to adhere to a good-faith effort to pay his creditors.  
 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
                                                          
22 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time.  
 
There is evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial issues are under control. 
Applicant acted responsibly by promptly addressing his two delinquent accounts.23 
Applicant’s actions under the circumstances no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.24 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.25   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He married a 
citizen of the Philippines who still resides in the Philippines with their daughter and his 
stepson, and there is the possibility of terrorist actions in the Philippines that might be 
directed at Applicant’s family members. Applicant allowed two minor medical accounts, 
totaling $448.53, to become delinquent. He created some controversy by not filing his 
federal income tax returns while he is still stationed overseas.   
                                                          
23 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
24 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
25 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or 
mishandling protected information. He has been an overseas satellite technician and site 
lead with his employer since September 2004. Applicant honorably retired from the U.S. 
Air Force. He was granted a top-secret security clearance in June 2009. Upon learning 
that he had two delinquent accounts, Applicant promptly paid them off. He has no other 
delinquent accounts. With regard to his federal income tax returns, Applicant is still a 
civilian acting under the directions of U.S. Armed Forces at an overseas location, and he 
has IRS-approved extensions to file his returns. In addition to his income tax return filing 
extensions, Applicant also has substantial tax exemptions while working overseas. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:26 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a positive track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, addressing his only two debts, and promptly resolving them. He has 
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that he can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Overall, the 
evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence and financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 2(d)(9). 
 
  
                                                          
26 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.c:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
