 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-02643 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from circumstances beyond her control. She 
established that she has acted responsibly under the circumstances in addressing her 
debts. Applicant’s financial difficulties are not reflective of her judgment and reliability. 
She has mitigated the security concerns about her debts, and her request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On April 24, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
 
 On June 15, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns under the adjudicative guidelines2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). Applicant timely 
responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on March 21, 2017, and I convened the requested hearing on 
June 15, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. At the outset of the hearing, 
Department Counsel withdrew the allegations under Guideline E. They originally were 
addressed in SOR paragraph 1 and subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. Accordingly, I 
amended the SOR so that the Guideline F allegations originally listed in SOR paragraph 
2 and subparagraphs 2.a – 2.aa are now addressed in SOR paragraph 1 and 1.a – 
1.aa.3  
 
 Department Counsel proffered three items identified as Government Exhibits 
(Gx.) 1 – 3. Applicant testified and proffered nine items identified as Applicant Exhibit 
(Ax.) A.4  I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 23, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $72,214 for 27 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.aa). The debts alleged at SOR 1.a – 1.d are 
for delinquent student loan accounts totaling $68,391. The $700 debt at SOR 1.aa is for 
a collection account pursuant to a civil judgment against Applicant in 2013. The 
remaining 22 allegations represent unpaid medical bills totaling $3,123. In response, 
Applicant admitted responsibility for SOR 1.a – 1.d, and explained she thought she had 
resolved the SOR 1.aa debt. Applicant denied responsibility for the medical debts, 
averring that her estranged husband is responsible for them. (Answer) In addition to any 
facts thus established, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3  See Tr. 9 – 10, 15 – 22, 24 - 36. 
 
4 A copy of Department Counsel’s January 19, 2017 “discovery letter” and a Government Exhibit List also 
are included as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I and II, respectively. See Tr. 13 – 14. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. She and her now-estranged husband were married in 
1992 and are currently in the midst of contentious litigation over division of marital 
assets and debts, child custody, and financial support obligations. They separated in 
2016. Of their three children, one is still a minor and lives with Applicant. Applicant 
served in the United States Army and Army Reserve from August 2008 until March 
2010, when the Army administratively discharged her. Applicant could not document a 
plan for the care of her child in the event of deployment because her estranged 
husband was not available or willing to do so. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A, D – H; Tr. 
46, 60) 
 
 Applicant obtained her bachelor’s and master’s degrees in 2007 and 2009, 
respectively. As of the hearing, she had completed studies for her doctorate in 
information systems and organization management, and she was finishing her doctoral 
thesis. After working part-time in information technology (IT) positions while in school, 
and after leaving the Army, Applicant worked for defense contractors until May 2013, 
when she left a job due to incompatibility with her supervisor. Unfortunately, Applicant 
could not find additional work until February 2015. She has worked for her current 
employer since February 2016. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. B; Tr. 61 – 62) 
 
 Applicant’s marriage deteriorated because her husband did not work and had 
developed a substance abuse problem, to include cocaine and prescription painkillers. 
Starting in August 1997, he physically and emotionally abused Applicant and their 
children, resulting in multiple interactions with law enforcement and the family court 
system, as well as requests for restraining orders. After they separated, Applicant’s 
husband retained control over their bank accounts and was still on Applicant’s health 
insurance policy. He would routinely empty their checking account without telling her. 
Additionally, he accrued the medical debts alleged in SOR 1.e – 1.z to obtain 
prescription painkillers. Applicant’s credit report attributes those debts to her because 
the medical coverage is in her name. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A, C – H; Tr. 40 – 41, 
46 – 48) 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR 1.a – 1.d are for student loans she obtained to pay her 
tuition. They became delinquent while Applicant was unemployed and because of her 
husband’s abuse of their bank accounts. She recently entered into three different 
student loan repayment and rehabilitation programs. She makes modest payment 
based on her income and will be back in good standing with those creditors by the end 
of 2017. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. K – M; Tr. 37 – 39, 43, 62 - 63) 
 
 Applicant denied the debt alleged at SOR 1.aa. She argued that she believes it 
arose from a compromise of her PayPal account information. While she has spoken 
with the judgment creditor on the phone, she has not pursued the matter to resolution 
because she is still pre-occupied with her ongoing divorce proceedings. Applicant did 
document her claimed dispute of this debt. (Answer; Ax. I; Tr. 51 – 53, 63) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s current finances are sound and she is frugal in her lifestyle. Most 
important, her husband no longer controls their finances. She and her child moved into 
lower-cost housing, and they have made several sacrifices to make ends meet and 
avoid future debts. Applicant sometimes receives food donations from her church, 
where she also has enrolled in a financial counseling class. The class helps her learn 
how to negotiate with creditors, manage her monthly budget, and plan for the future. 
Applicant’s husband has not complied with court-ordered support payments, but 
Applicant still has a modest positive cash flow after monthly expenses, and she has 
started a retirement savings plan. She files and pays her taxes on time (her last federal 
refund was used for divorce-related legal fees), and she meets all of her regular 
obligations. In her testimony, she exhibited a good command of her finances and an 
understanding of what will be required to resolve her financial problems. (Answer; Ax. J; 
Ax. N; Tr. 48 – 49, 54 – 57, 64 – 66) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                 
5 See Directive. 6.3. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Available information documented the SOR allegations that 
                                                 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant owes or owed a significant level of past-due or delinquent debt. As of the 
hearing, those debts had not been addressed. 
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are the result of the deterioration of her marriage 
to an abusive spouse. Her estranged husband physically and emotionally abused her 
and her children, while taking money to support his drug problem and running up unpaid 
medical bills to obtain prescription painkillers. In the last year, while trying to finalize 
their divorce, Applicant has taken reasonable actions regarding her student loan debts, 
and in the absence of court-ordered financial support from her husband, she has cut 
expenses to make sure she can meet all of her ongoing financial obligations. Her efforts 
under these circumstances to resolve her debts reflect well on her judgment and 
reliability. In view of all of the foregoing, the continued presence of unresolved debts is 
not disqualifying. All of the above-named mitigating conditions apply, and Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by adverse information about her finances.  
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s actions to resolve her debts are sufficient to satisfy the security 
concerns raised by her financial problems. A fair and commonsense assessment of the 
record as a whole shows that the Government’s security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.aa: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
