 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 16-00448 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s investment property was foreclosed around 2006. He did not provide 
documentation showing the mortgage debt was resolved through the foreclosure. 
Applicant’s September 22, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or 
security clearance application (SCA) asked whether he had a property foreclosed in the 
previous seven years. Applicant did not disclose the foreclosure because he believed the 
foreclosure occurred more than seven years before he completed his SCA. Personal 
conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On September 22, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his SCA. (Item 3) On June 
7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
                                         
 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). (Item 1) 
 
On August 2, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not 
request a hearing. (Item 2) On August 29, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File 
of Relevant Material (FORM). On September 2, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, and 
he did not respond to the FORM. On August 14, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The 
case file consists of six exhibits. (Items 1-6) Applicant did not object to any of the 
Government exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and for SOR ¶ 2.a, he 
admitted that he did not disclose his foreclosed property on his SCA. (Item 2) His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 63 years old, and a DOD contractor has employed him in logistics since 
November 2008.3 From 2005 to 2008, he worked as a program manager. From 1978 to 
2005, he served as an Army logistics officer. He was honorably retired from the Army in 
2005 as a colonel. (Items 2, 3) In 1972, he married, and his children were born in 1972, 
1978, and 1982. In 2000, he received a master’s degree. There is no evidence of security 
violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s October 20, 2015 credit report has the following information about his 
delinquent mortgage account: date open is December 2006; date report is November 2009; 
last act is January 2009; balance is $226,131; past due is $25,911; and comments are 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s September 
22, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 
3) 
 
3 
                                         
 
“foreclosure proceedings initiated.” (Item 4) The account was previously transferred from 
another mortgage lender in September 2009. (Item 4) His June 8, 2016 credit report does 
not list the foreclosure account or any delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s November 2, 2015 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI) indicates that Applicant purchased a rental property around 2005 
for about $120,000, and his monthly payment was about $1,200. The property was 
frequently vandalized, and he was losing money. He believed the property was foreclosed 
in 2006, and he could not explain why the credit report indicated the foreclosure was in 
2009 or why the mortgage amount was indicated as $226,131. 
 
In his SOR response, Applicant said he defaulted on the mortgage on his investment 
property in 2006. The property was involved in the mortgage fraud occurring in 2006 to 
2008. He did not provide any documentation about the foreclosure or default. He did not 
indicate whether or not a deficiency resulted after the mortgage was foreclosed.        
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was crucial for him to 
provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debt on the SOR. 
(FORM at 3-4) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary 
evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved 
the SOR debt. He did not receive financial counseling. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 
days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting 
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do 
not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned 
to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in 
this FORM. (FORM at 4) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Section 26 of Applicant’s September 22, 2015 SCA asks whether in the previous 
seven years Applicant had any property foreclosed. Applicant answered, no, and he did 
not disclose the property foreclosure discussed in the previous section. In his November 
2, 2015 OPM personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant said he did not list the foreclosure 
on his SCA because he believed the foreclosure occurred more than seven years before 
he completed his SCA. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 
528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
 
4 
                                         
 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination 
as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, nothing in 
this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President, Secretary 
of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being 
eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case 
No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition 
never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially overextended is at 
greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to 
generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial considerations 
security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted) 
as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of 
his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the totality of an 
applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge must consider 
pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, judgment, and other 
qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as well as the 
vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive presumes a 
nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines and an 
applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for the 
debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
  
 
6 
                                         
 
Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue. 
 
  
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other 
good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the 
term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires 
a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show 
that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the 
benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR 
Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents evidence 
raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or 
mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard applicable in 
security clearance decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information 
will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 
2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply; however, Applicant presented some 
mitigating information. Applicant described vandalism of his investment property, and the 
national decline in real estate market prices in 2005-2008 are circumstances beyond his 
control that adversely affected his finances.  
 
Applicant admitted that his investment property was foreclosed in 2006. He did not 
indicate whether there was a deficiency after the foreclosure. He did not provide 
documentation relating to this SOR debt such as: (1) proof of payments, such as checking 
account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he 
paid or made any payments to the creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to 
establish maintenance of contact;6 (3) copies of credible debt disputes sent to the creditor 
and/or credit reporting companies indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the 
debt and why he held such a belief; (4) evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve this 
debt; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution.  
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving the SOR debt. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
  
                                            
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
8 
                                         
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”7 Applicant’s October 20, 
2015 credit report states the last act on his mortgage account was in January 2009 and 
the past due amount is $25,911. This may mean the last payment was around January 
2007 because his credit report indicated he was about two years behind on his mortgage. 
Applicant said he did not disclose the foreclosure of his rental property because he believed 
it occurred in 2006.  
 
Applicant’s foreclosure was not listed on his June 8, 2016 credit report. “[T]hat some 
debts have dropped off his credit report is not meaningful evidence of debt resolution.” 
ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 
3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015)). The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires removal of most 
negative financial items from a credit report seven years from the first date of delinquency 
or the debt becoming collection barred because of a state statute of limitations, whichever 
is longer.8 Debts may be dropped from a credit report upon dispute when creditors believe 
the debt is not going to be paid or when the debt has been charged off. The absence of 
the debt on his June 8, 2016 credit report raises the issue of whether the last act on account 
is accurate. I accept Applicant’s statement that he honestly and sincerely believed the 
foreclosure occurred more than seven years prior to his completion of his October 20, 2015 
                                            
7 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider 
the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. 
[Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had 
established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted 
to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
8 Title 15 U.S.C. § 1681c. See Federal Trade Commission website, Summary of Fair Credit Reporting 
Act Updates at Section 605, https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0111-fair-credit-reporting-act.pdf. 
 
9 
                                         
 
SCA as credible. He has refuted the allegation that he intentionally failed to disclose his 
foreclosure on his SCA. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity 
at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and E 
are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 63 years old, and a DOD contractor has employed him in logistics since 
November 2008. From 2005 to 2008, he worked as a program manager. From 1978 to 
2005, he served as an Army logistics officer. He was honorably retired from the Army in 
2005 as a colonel. In 1972, he married, and his children were born in 1972, 1978, and 
1982. In 2000, he received a master’s degree. There is no evidence of security violations, 
abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
The evidence against grant of a security clearance is more substantial. Applicant 
provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments 
and an established payment plan for his SOR mortgage debt.9 He did not provide a detailed 
plan about how he intended to resolve this debt. His actions show lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
documented information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or financial progress 
is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security clearance. 
                                            
9 It is theoretically possible that the mortgage debt was resolved years ago through a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure or through some other mechanism. Applicant has the burden of producing the evidence to 
establish resolution of the debt, and this he did not do. 
 
10 
                                         
 
See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me 
to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This 
decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain 
the state of reform necessary for award of a security clearance in the future. With more 
effort towards documented resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior 
consistent with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence 
of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal 
conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, financial consideration security 
concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
