 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00395 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 7, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 6, 
2016. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. She was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the 
Government’s Items and provided documents marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
though D. There were no objections and the evidence for both parties was admitted. 
The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny the sole allegation in the SOR. It will be 
considered a denial. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. She continues to attend college, but has not earned a 
degree. She has two adult children. She was married from 1994 to 1999. She has held 
different levels of security clearances since approximately 1990. Applicant has worked 
for federal contractors for many years throughout her career. She has worked for her 
current employer, a federal contractor, since February 2013.2 
 
 Applicant attributed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($73,926) to a period of 
unemployment. In December 2012, Applicant lost her job. She contacted her mortgage 
lender immediately because she was unable to make the payments, and was given a 
three-month forbearance. She resumed working in February 2013 and applied for a loan 
modification. The completion of the loan modification has been repeatedly delayed for a 
variety of reasons, including multiple loan officers being assigned to her case; claims of 
incomplete paperwork; and changes to the terms of the modification by the lender that 
were unacceptable to Applicant. Documents provided by Applicant show that she has 
been actively engaged with the mortgage lender to resolve her mortgage debt. She was 
finally approved in April 2016 to enter a trial period plan under a modification program, 
which she accepted. At the time Applicant completed her answer to the SOR, she had 
not yet completed the trial period under the plan. Credit reports from November 2014 
and May 2016, reflect the mortgage debt.3 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she stated that she had successfully 
completed the trial period under the plan, but then was told by the mortgage lender that 
she did not qualify for a final modification because it had not received her documents 
within the required timeframe. She disputed this and provided copies of fax sheets 
presumably showing that the documents were timely submitted. Applicant provided a 
                                                          
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4, 5. 
 
3 
 
 
document that shows the issue was to be resolved through mediation at a hearing 
scheduled in December 2016.4 
 
 Applicant stated that she has been financially responsible by continuing to work 
with her mortgage lender, while pursuing a resolution that would not jeopardize her 
financial future. Although the process has been lengthy and time-consuming, she is 
attempting to hold the mortgage lender accountable to complete the modification 
process in accordance with the rules.5  
 
 Applicant provided a document to show she sought financial counseling in June 
2014, and established a budget. She stated that she has never lived beyond her means. 
She is not an excessive spender and plans for purchases. She has no car payments 
and that she has always responsibly managed her finances and debts.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
4 AE A, B, C, D. 
 
5 Item 1; AE A. 
 
6 Item 1; AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts. 
 
 Applicant has a past-due mortgage debt that is unresolved. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying condition. 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty when she was unemployed from 
December 2012 to February 2013. She took immediate action and contacted her 
mortgage lender and was granted a forbearance on her loan. She has been actively 
engaged with the lender to modify the loan and resolve the arrearages, but it has been 
repeatedly delayed for a variety of reasons. Applicant actions show that she has not 
ignored her financial responsibility. This issue is ongoing so AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s unemployment and lack of money at the time caused her mortgage to 
become past-due. This was beyond her control. There is some evidence that the lender 
made it difficult for her to modify the loan because it repeatedly changed the terms of 
the modification, changed loan officers, and claimed it had not received documents 
timely, when it had. Although the debt is not yet resolved, Applicant has acted 
responsibly in addressing it. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant participated in financial counseling and had a mediation hearing 
scheduled in December 2016 to resolve the past-due mortgage. She has been actively 
engaged with the mortgage lender to resolve the debt and has adhered to its numerous 
requirements. This is not a case of her ignoring her financial responsibility, but rather 
she has legitimate concerns that she be granted the proper modification to which she 
 
6 
 
 
believes she is legally entitled. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. Applicant does not dispute 
owing the debt and is engaged with the mortgage lender to resolve it. AG¶ 20(e) does 
not apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old and has been steadily employed by federal contractors 
for most of her career, except for a short period of unemployment. During that time, she 
was unable to pay her mortgage. She has been actively engaged with the lender to 
modify her mortgage. She stated she has met the qualifications and has never ignored 
her financial responsibility to the lender. The debt was being resolved through 
mediation.  
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
There is also no requirement that an applicant pay every debt listed in the SOR, only 
that she remove concerns about her reliability and trustworthiness raised by those 
debts. See ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 (App. Bd. August 4, 2014).  
 
 
7 
 
 
The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
