                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 15-06976
                                                            )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq.
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
History of Case
On May 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative
judge to determine whether a security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied,
or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), effective within the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive
(SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were established to supercede all
previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures for
administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DOD
5220.6, subject to the updated substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017.
Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not
change the results of the decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 1, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was previously assigned to another judge and was reassigned to me on October
20, 2016.The case was scheduled for hearing on November 16, 2016. At the scheduled
hearing, the Government's case consisted of nine exhibits (GEs 1-9); Applicant relied on
one witness (himself) and six exhibits (AEs A-F). The transcript (Tr.) was received on
November 23, 2016.   
Besides its seven exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of
certain facts pertaining to Afghanistan. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate
type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App.
Bd. April 12, 2007). Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government
reports that are well known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co.
2006).  
There being no objection, and for good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the requested facts and incorporated source documents
addressing the geopolitical situation in Afghanistan. The Government’s administrative
notice and incorporated source documents were received as HE 1. Administrative notice
was extended to the requested facts and incorporated source documents consistent with
the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid. This notice did not foreclose Applicant from
challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports
addressing the current status of Afghanistan. 
In addition to taking official notice of the source documents covered by he
administrative Notice, I also took official notice, sua sponte, of Background Note:
Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (November 2011) This document contains
pertinent background information covering Afghanistan. This document was received as
HE 2.
Applicant, in turn, requested administrative notice be taken of additional facts and
incorporated source documents pertaining to Afghanistan. There being no objection, and
for good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to Applicant’s 
requested facts and incorporated source documents addressing the geopolitical situation
in Afghanistan.  Applicant’s administrative notice request was received as HE 3.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with a request for administrative
notice of additional pertinent facts pertaining to Afghanistan. For good cause shown,
2
Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record, and the Government was
afforded two days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant provided a request for
administrative notice of pertinent facts and supporting source documents related to
Afghanistan. Applicant’s  submissions were admitted without objection as AE G.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly (a) has immediate family members (a
mother and three sisters) who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan; (b) a spouse
who is a citizen of Afghanistan residing in the United States; (c) has a father-in-law who
is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan; (d) has a mother-in-law who is a citizen of
Afghanistan resident of Pakistan; (e) sent between $15,000 and $20,000 to his mother
between March 2010 and October 2012; and (f) has inheritance rights to property in
Afghanistan. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed he has not remitted any money to his mother in Afghanistan
since 2012. Applicant denied the remaining SOR allegations with explanations. He
claimed his wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing in the United States. He further
claimed his father-in-law is deceased and his mother-in-law resides in Afghanistan. He
claimed he has not remitted any money to his mother since 2012 and lost his inheritance
rights when he applied for U.S. citizenship.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted
as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan to parents of Afghan descent. (GEs
1 and 2)  He married an Afghan citizen in July 2010 and has one child (age two) from
this marriage. (GEs 1-2); Tr. 22, 40) Applicant immigrated to the United States in
October 2008 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 2014. (GE 1; Tr. 35-36) In
June 2014, he renounced his Afghan citizenship and surrendered his U.S. passport.
(GEs 5-6 and AE F; Tr. 46)  By renouncing his Afghan citizenship, he implicitly forfeited
his inheritance rights and property rights and his property rights to property owned by his
family in Afghanistan. (Tr. 33-34 and 47) 
Applicant studied medicine in Afghanistan and earned a medical degree in March
2004. (GE 1; Tr. 48) He has pursued no post-graduate education since immigrating to
the United States in 2008, and has no current plans to pursue a medical license in the
United States. (GE 1; Tr. 48-49) Applicant reported no Afghan or U.S. military service.
(GE 1)  Since January 2015, Applicant has been employed by his current employer as a
linguist and deployed with his military command in Afghanistan. (GE 1; Tr. 22, 42-43)
Between April 2013 and January 2015, he was unemployed. He worked for several
employers between October 2004 and April 2013 as an interpreter and language
3
instructor. (GE 1) Applicant has never held a security clearance for the DOD or any other
federal agency. (GE 1; Tr. 24)
Travel records document Applicant’s frequent travels between Afghanistan and
the United States before he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (GEs 3-4) In these
travels, he used his Afghan passport. After becoming a US. Citizen in March 2014,
Applicant, he used his U.S. passport exclusively when traveling on his employer-related
assignments. (AE F) 
Applicant’s Family Members
Applicant’s wife was born and raised in Afghanistan and immigrated to the United
States in 2010 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2016. (GE 1; Tr. 29-30) 
She received her U.S. passport in March 2016. (AE B) His wife temporarily resides with
her sister in the United States while Applicant is deployed. (Tr. 42)
Applicant’s father is deceased, and his mother resides in Afghanistan. She never
worked for the Afghan government and has been a housewife her entire life. (Tr. 26-27)
Applicant is currently sponsoring his mother for an immigration visa, which is still
pending. And he maintains monthly contact with her mother. (AE C; Tr. 19)
Applicant has three sisters who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. (GE 1;
Tr. 27-28) His oldest sister does not work and resides with her mother in one of
Afghanistan’s largest cities. (Tr. 29) His two youngest sisters both reside in Afghanistan.
Both sisters are employed as school teachers in a primary school. Neither of Applicant’s
youngest sisters have ever worked for the Afghan government, or have any affiliations or
connections with the Afghan government. (Tr. 38-39) Applicant maintains infrequent
contact with his sisters. (Tr. 29, 38) None of his three sisters are aware of Applicant’s
work as an interpreter for the United States. 
Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. (GE 1; Tr. 30) His mother-in-law is an
Afghan citizen who no longer resides in Pakistan. (Tr. 30-31) She resides in Afghanistan
and has no ties or affiliation with the Afghan government. (GEs 1 and 5-8; Tr. 31)
Applicant has infrequent contact with his mother-in-law. (Tr. 31)
Between March 2010 and October 2012, Applicant remitted between $15,000 and
$20,000 to his mother in Afghanistan for her use in making wedding preparations for
himself and his fiancee. (Tr. 35) He estimated 80 % of the proceeds remitted to his
mother were devoted to his wedding ceremony, with the remaining 20% (i.e., $12,000
and $13,000) committed to his mother’s sisters for their personal needs. (Tr. 33-34 and
47)
Country information on Afghanistan
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is sometimes referred to as the
crossroads of Central Asia.  See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 2.  It has had
a turbulent history. 
4
 Following invasions by Alexander, the Scythians, the White Huns, and the Turks,
the Arabs invaded Afghanistan in 642 AD and introduced Islam. See Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra, at 3.  Arab rule held for several hundred years before giving way to
the Persians who controlled the region to 998 before succumbing to the Turkic
Ghasnavids. Id. Turkish rule under Mahmud was short-lived and was followed by
attempts by various princes to rule sections of the country before the Mongol invasion of
1219 under Genghis Khan. Id. For many centuries following Khan’s death in 1227, the
country was contested by a  succession of chiefs and princes. By the late 14  century,th
Tamerlane (a Khan descendent) incorporated Afghanistan into a vast Asian empire.  Id.
In 1747, Ahmad Shah Durrani (the founder of what is known today as
Afghanistan) established his control over most of Afghanistan. British expansion in the
19  century was countered by Russian advances and precipitated Anglo-Afghan warsth
and later led to a boundary accord that created what would become modern Afghanistan. 
See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 3.
Since the British relinquished control in August 1919, Afghanistan has been an
independent state. Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 3-4.  Between 1919 and
1973, Afghanistan moved away from its longstanding isolation under a succession of
Muslim rulers: King Amanullah (1919-1929), Nadir Khan (1929-1933), and Mohammad
Zahir Shah (Nadir Khan’s 19-year-old son), who ruled Afghanistan for over 40 years
(1933-1973).  See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. 
Prime minister between 1953 and 1963, Sardar Mohammad Daoud mounted a
military coup in 1973 and seized power amid charges of corruption and malfeasance
against Zahir Shah and his royal family. Daoud proceeded to abolish the monarchy,
abrogate the constitution, and declare Afghanistan a republic. (Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra, at, 4-5).  His economic and social reforms contributed little, however,
to stabilizing political conditions in the country.   
Following a Soviet-supported overthrow and assassination of Daoud in April 1978,
a Marxist government was formed with the backing of the Soviets.  (Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra, at 5). Sur Muhammad Taraki was installed as the country’s president
of the revolutionary council.  Opposition to the Taraki government increased as many of
members of Afghan elites, religious establishments, and intelligentsia were imprisoned,
tortured, or murdered.  A revolt against the Marxist government occurred in the summer
of 1978 and quickly spread into a countrywide insurgency. (Id.)  
Soviet invasion
Seeking to take advantage of the unrest following the April 1978 coup, the Soviet
Union quickly signed a bilateral treaty of friendship and cooperation with the new Afghan
regime and increased its military assistance to the regime. See Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra, at 5-6. Faced with a deteriorating security situation, the Soviets
invaded Afghanistan in December 1979, killed the Afghan ruler, and installed Babrak
Karmal (an exiled leader of the Parcham faction) as the country’s prime minister. (id.) 
5
Afghan freedom fighters (mujahideen) who opposed the Karmal communist
regime, armed with increased weapons and training assistance from the U.S. and its
allies, collaborated with other Peshawar-based guerilla groups in the 1980s to destabilize
the Karmal regime. See  Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 6-7. The resistance
movement eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords (signed by the
front-line states of Pakistan and Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union).
The agreement served to ensure that Soviet forces withdrew from the country in
accordance with their expressed commitments in February 1989. (id.) 
Ascendency of the Taliban  
By the mid-1990s, the Taliban had risen to power in reaction to the anarchy and
increase of warlords in the aftermath of the withdrawal of Soviet forces.  Many of the
Taliban had been educated in madrassas in Pakistan with roots in rural Pashtun areas of
the country.  See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 7  Beginning with its capture
of Kandahar in 1994, the Taliban mounted an aggressive expansion of its control
throughout Afghanistan. By the end of 1998, its forces occupied almost 90 percent of the
country, and reduced its opposition largely to a small sections of the northeast and the
Panjshir valley. (id.)   
Bolstered by its imposition of an extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire
country, the Taliban committed massive human rights violations (particularly directed at
women and children), and committed serious atrocities against minority populations. 
From the mid-1990s, the Taliban provided sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, and provided
a base of operations for his and other terrorist organizations. (Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra, at 7-8). Bin Laden and his Al-Qaida group are known to have
provided financial and political support to the Taliban, and acknowledged their
responsibility for the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks against the United States.    
Beginning in October 2001 (following the Taliban’s refusal to expel bin Laden), the
United States and its coalition partners initiated a military campaign, targeting terrorist
facilities and Taliban military and political assets within Afghanistan. U.S. military and
anti-Taliban forces routed the Taliban and caused their rapid disintegration. After the fall
of Kabul in November 2001, a UN-sponsored conference was created to restore stability
and governance in Afghanistan. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 7-8. From
this conference emerged a Transitional Authority headed by President Hamid Karzai.
This authority (renamed the Transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan) was charged with
the responsibility of drafting a constitution. (id, at 8)
A new constitution was drafted and ratified by a constitutional loyal jirga on
January 4, 2004. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 8. The Afghan
constitution provides for indirect election of the National Assembly’s upper house by the
provincial councils and by reserved presidential appointments. On December 4, 2004,
the country was renamed the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.  (id; Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, supra, at 1). Hamid Karzai was sworn in as Afghanistan’s
President on December 7, 2004. He presided over the new government’s first convened
parliament in late 2005. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. 
6
Presidential and provincial elections in Afghanistan for 2010 were  coordinated by
the Afghanistan Independent Election Commission (IEC), with assistance from the UN. 
Id. Challenged presidential election results in 2010 have not been widely disseminated. 
See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 8-9. 
 
Political conditions in Afghanistan
A new democratic government assumed control of Afghanistan in 2004 following a
popular election.  While the national government has continued to expand its authority, it
has been hampered in its ability to deliver necessary social services and remains
dependent on U.S.-led assistance. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. With its
international community support at work, its ability to secure its borders and maintain
internal order is increasing. Although the Taliban-led insurgency in Afghanistan has lost
ground in some areas, it remains resilient and capable of challenging U.S. and NATO
goals. Today, Afghanistan’s local government lags, and corruption remains widespread.
See Administrative Notice, supra, at 3; K. Katzman, Afghanistan, Post-Taliban
Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, CRS Report for Congress at 9 (October 2015) 
Afghan insurgency and extremist networks, fueled by Taliban, Al Qaida, and
Haqqani Network support, continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. 
See Administrative Notice, supra; K. Katzman, Afghanistan, Post-Taliban Governance,
Security, and U.S. Policy, supra, at 22-23. Safety and security remain key concerns
because these terrorist organizations continue to target U.S. and Afghan interests by
suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, and hostage-
taking. See Report on Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan, U.S. Department
of Defense (June 2015).  Risks of terrorist activity remain extremely high at the present
time. See Administrative Notice, supra, at 3-4
Human rights conditions in Afghanistan remain poor by all reported accounts. 
State Department Reports confirm active insurgent activity in Afghanistan, prompting the
U.S. State Department to place Afghanistan in Tier 2. See K. Katzman, Afghanistan,
Post-Taliban Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, supra, at 17. The Department of
State’s 2014 Human Rights Report also noted widespread violence, predominantly
indiscriminate attacks on civilians, armed insurgents groups’ killing of persons affiliated
with the Afghan government, and targeted violence against women and girls. See
Country Reports on Human rights Practices for 2015: Afghanistan, U.S. Department of
State (June 2016). 
No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from risks of violence, kidnapping,
hostage taking, military combat, operations, land-mines, banditry, armed rivalry between
political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and indirect fire, suicide bombings, and
insurgent attacks. See Travel Warning, Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (June
2016).  Kabul, in particular, has experienced increased militant attacks in recent years,
including rocket attacks, vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices (IEDs), and suicide
bombings. Id. Foreigners throughout the country continue to be targeted for violent
attacks and kidnappings: some motivated by terrorism, and others by common criminal
activity. 
7
To date, Afghanistan has still encountered difficulties in building effective, honest,
and loyal provincial and district institutions and lacks a coherent tribal engagement
strategy for unifying the country. See Administrative Notice, supra, at 3-4; Report on
Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan, supra, at 29-30. The protracted Afghan
election of June 2014 and the accompanying delays in forming a new government
contributed to political uncertainties and delays in the development of the U.S. long-term
security partnership with the new Afghan unity government. (Id. at 2) 
Economic growth has been similarly slowed by a lack of investor confidence in the
Afghan government and its prospects for the future. (Id.) Encouragingly, Afghanistan’s
unity leaders (notably President Gani and Chief Executive Abdullah) have proven to be
amenable to working more cooperatively with the United States and other interested
members of the international community. (Id.) This creates opportunities for the United
States to deepen and strengthen its partnership with Afghanistan. 
U.S.-Afghanistan relations
Looking to the future, the United States recognizes the many challenges that the
unity government of Afghanistan will continue to contend with as their leaders settle their
own respective responsibilities. See Report on Enhancing Security and Stability in
Afghanistan, supra at 3. Despite these challenges, the fundamental partnership between
the U.S.-led coalition and the Afghan government remains strong. (Id.) 
Since the fall of the Taliban, the United States has supported the creation of a
broad-based government in Afghanistan, and has made a long-term commitment to help
Afghanistan reconstitute and rebuild following years of war and unstable governments. 
The United States and its coalition partners in the international community currently
provide important humanitarian assistance, capacity-building, security protection,
counter-narcotic programs, and infrastructure projects. The United States has also
brought important political influence to bear on the establishment of durable democratic
principles that recognize and incorporate democratic principles, promote the rule of law
and encourage transparent and accountable forms of government. See Report on
Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan, supra.
In May 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed the Enduring Strategic
Partnership Agreement, demonstrated the United States’ shared commitment to the
combating of terrorism and the promoting of democratic values and economic
opportunity in Afghanistan and the region. See AE G and U.S. Relations with
Afghanistan Fact Sheet, U.S. Department of State (October 2015). Through the New Silk
Road initiative forged between Afghanistan and the United states in 2011 as a means of
reconstructing infrastructure links in the region, both countries have helped to bolster
peace and stability in the region by supporting a transition to trade and the opening of
new markets in Central Asia and beyond. See AE G and U.S. Support for the Silk Road,
U.S. Department of State (March 2016) 
  What strategic options the United States ultimately adopt to enhance its working
relations with Afghan’s unity government in their joint efforts to limit the advances of an
8
increasingly aggressive Taliban are uncertain at this time.  Decisions on the appropriate
level of troop strength will require some careful balancing and calibrating.
Endorsements and Awards
Applicant is highly regarded by senior military commanders who worked closely
with Applicant in Afghan military operations in 2007 and 2008. (AE E) They consistently
credited Applicant with exceptional translation work while working in positions requiring
high trust while embedded with military commands operating in Afghanistan. (AE E)
They extolled his substantial contributions to the promotion of good and efficient relations
between the International Security Force (ISAF) and the respective Afghan ministries.
(AE E)
Applicant  earned numerous certificates of achievement and appreciation from the 
military commands he worked closely with while assigned to Afghanistan. (AE D) These
awards express gratitude for Applicant’s commitment and achievements to his military
commands while working foreign translation assignments. (AE D) 
Policies
The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the
"[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns, if any. These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied.  Although, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive
reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in
arriving at a decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(d) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following ¶ 2(d) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
9
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to,
business, financial, and property interests, are a security concern if they result in divided
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create circumstances in
which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is known to
target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995)  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
10
ultimate burden of demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is a highly regarded linguist for a U.S.-based defense contractor. He
is an Afghan citizen by birth and a naturalized U.S. citizen with permanent residency in
the United States. Foreign influence concerns relate to Applicant’s having immediate
and extended family members who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen whose mother, sisters, and in-laws are
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Security concerns are raised under the foreign
influence guideline due to Applicant’s having family members residing in Afghanistan
and alleged financial interests in Afghanistan. Afghanistan itself is a country with a
somewhat checkered history of wars, political instability, and violence. 
Despite encouraging efforts in the development of strategic partnerships
between Afghanistan and the United States in recent years, Afghanistan remains a
war-torn country and one still in the process of establishing a stable democratic
government that is able to build effective, honest, and loyal provincial and district
institutions, provide effective protections for its constituent groups, and maintain cross-
border security. The historically close relationship between Applicant and his
immediate and extended family members who reside in Afghanistan makes them
potentially vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive measures.  
Because Taliban, Al Qaida, and Haqqani Network insurgents operating in
Afghanistan have a history of violating Afghan domestic laws and regulations, as well
as international laws, they are more likely to use improper and illegal means, or one of
the other, to obtain classified information in Applicant’s possession or control through
his family members still residing in Afghanistan. DC ¶ 7(a), “contact, regardless of
method, with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion,” applies.   
To date, none of Applicant’s mother, sisters, and in-laws residing in Afghanistan
have any history of being subjected to any coercion or influence. These historical
antecedents do limit the severity of any potential conflict situation. However, the
absence of any past coercive measures taken by Afghan authorities does not
completely absolve Applicant from coercive risks in the future given Afghanistan’s 
considerable history of wars, political instability, violence, hostage taking, and abusive
measures taken against its own citizens.  For these reasons, ¶ DC 7(b), “connections
to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information
or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
11
providing that information or technology,” has some application to Applicant and his
family members residing in Afghanistan. 
Still, none of Applicant’s immediate and extended family members have any
known affiliations or connections with the Afghan government or their military, or any
other foreign government. Any potential conflict that might be associated with his
sisters presents a low risk and not likely to pose any conflicts of interest for Applicant
in the foreseeable future. 
As a nation, Afghanistan continues to be a country with emerging strategic
relationships with the United States and is a front-line partner in the war on terror. 
Because of the security dangers that still confront U.S. and Afghanistan forces
operating in the region, Afghanistan remains a country that presents a heightened risk. 
Afghanistan is also a country that is benefitting from long-term U.S. commitments to
help the Afghan government and its tribal regions reconstitute and rebuild their
institutions and infrastructure in the aftermath of years of war, human rights abuses, 
and political and economic mismanagement under Soviet-backed regimes and Taliban
rule. Given the current geopolitical infrastructure that exists in Afghanistan, the risk of
a pressure or influence situation involving an immediate or extended family member of
Applicant’s can be characterized as somewhat reduced, commensurate with improved
security and political conditions on the ground in the country. 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of
foreign countries in general. What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one
foreign country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical
necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Afghanistan. The
revised AGs take into account the country’s demonstrated relations with the United
States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives with
citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The geopolitical
aims and policies of the particular foreign regime in issue do matter. 
Applicant’s situation is a special one for reasons that pertain wholly to his
unique status and circumstances as a linguist working with military commands
operating in Afghanistan. Not only has he been careful to avoid any frequent contact
with his sisters and in-laws in Afghanistan, but he has been scrupulous about making
certain his family members are not aware of his linguist assignments and duties that
cover Afghan culture and political conditions. 
In special circumstances involving linguists who put themselves in harm’s way
by working in and out of unstable countries where they have family members residing,
the Appeal Board has been quick to note that such individuals are more likely to
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or
insurgent group at coercion or exploitation. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App.
Bd. Feb. 5, 2008).  Applicant’s strong connections to the United States and to his U.S.
family members, community, and his employment as a linguist for military commands
12
operating in Afghanistan make it highly unlikely he would ever resolve any potential
conflict against his U.S. interests.  
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the United
States,” is available to Applicant. Balancing security interests associated with
Applicant’s Afghanistan-based family members, conclusions warrant that neither
Applicant nor his immediate or extended family members residing in Afghanistan pose
any heightened security risks that could subject them to potential pressures and
influence from Afghan  government and military officials. 
Of benefit to Applicant, too, is  MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or
allegiance to the group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.” Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments
to the United States are well demonstrated and sufficient under these circumstances
to neutralize all potential conflicts that are implicit in his relationships with his
immediate and extended family residing in Afghanistan.   
One other mitigating condition has application to Applicant’s situation.  MC ¶
8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests
is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to
influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.” is fully applicable. He has no current
financial interests in Afghanistan, and uncertain likelihood of ever acquiring any
inheritance rights in the country that could create any conflicts in the foreseeable
future.    
To complete a  whole-person assessment of Applicant’s foreign influence risks
to ascertain whether they are fully compatible with minimum security clearance
eligibility requirements, Applicant’s substantial civilian contributions to U.S. security
interests as an Afghan linguist require careful balancing with the raised security
concerns. His endorsements and certificates of appreciation attest to his valuable
contributions to U.S. military forces operating in Afghanistan. They are impressive.
Further, Applicant is recognized for the important role he has played with the military
commands he serves during his translation assignments.
Whole-person assessment is available also to minimize Applicant’s exposure to
conflicts of interests with his Afghan family members. Most importantly, Applicant is
not aware of any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that either his mother, sisters
or in-laws might be exposed to. So, in Applicant’s case, the potential risk of coercion,
pressure, or influence being brought to bear on him, or any of his respective family
members residing in Afghanistan, is very low and mitigated. 
13
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following
separate formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g: For Applicant
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information.  Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
14
