 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00711 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines J, criminal conduct, E, personal conduct, and F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2016, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 17, 
2016. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 9. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM, object to the Items, or provide documents. Items 1 through 8 are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on August 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e, 2.c, 2.d, 3.a, 3.b, 
3.c, 3.e and 3.f.2 She denied the remaining SOR allegations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. She has never been married and has no children. She 
is attending community college. Applicant served in the military from 1999 to 2002 when 
she was discharged with a General Discharge under Honorable Conditions. The basis 
of her discharge was due to the “commission of a serious offense.”3 She has worked for 
her present employer, a federal contractor, since 2012 and also has held a part-time job 
since 2014.4 
 
 In November 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony deposit 
account fraud (bad checks). During Applicant’s July 2015 background interview by a 
government investigator, she stated that she was not aware that she was charged with 
a felony. She stated that this charge was related to criminal charges associated with her 
court-martial. She admitted she went to the Sherriff’s office in the county where she was 
stationed and where the offense took place, and she was booked and released. She 
stated she was not aware that this was considered an arrest. She was found guilty by a 
magistrate court and convicted of misdemeanor deposit account fraud/bad checks $499 
or less, and was sentenced to 12 months of probation, restitution, and a fine. The 
evidence confirms that this was a separate charge in a civilian court.5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 SOR ¶ 3.f is misidentified as ¶ 3.d, but is sequentially after ¶ 3.e. It will be referred to as SOR ¶ 3.f. 
 
3 Item 7.  
 
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 5. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a city and state where the offense allegedly took place. Applicant stated in 
her answer that she had never been arrested in this city, and was on active duty in the military at the time 
in a different state. Item 5 shows that the name of the county where the arrest and conviction took place 
is the same name as the city alleged in the SOR and is the same place where Applicant was stationed at 
the time alleged. Department Counsel addressed this discrepancy in the FORM that was sent to 
Applicant. There was no reply by Applicant to the FORM and no objection to any of the evidence. Item 5 
confirms Applicant’s arrest and conviction.  
 
3 
 
 
 In February 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with forgery, fraud-
impersonation, and fraud-credit card. She was arraigned at a General Court-Martial in 
March 2002. She was charged with four specifications of Attempt to Wrongfully 
Appropriate Lawful Currency from four different entities on four separate occasions; four 
specifications of Larceny and Wrongful Appropriation of Lawful Currency, of varying 
value, on four separate occasions from three different entities; and two specifications of 
Forgery with Intent to Defraud, on two separate occasions. Applicant pled guilty to the 
charge of “wrongful appropriation” vice “stealing.” Applicant was found guilty of all 
offenses and specifications and was sentenced by a military judge to confinement for 11 
months and reduction to E-1.6 Applicant did not disclose on her security clearance 
application (SCA) that she had been charged with felonies at her General Court-Martial. 
She claimed her Defense Counsel told her the charge was a misdemeanor and not a 
felony. She stated she destroyed her documents regarding the court-martial a long time 
ago and she was unable to obtain a new one. She denied deliberately falsifying her 
security clearance application.  
 
 During her background interview, Applicant admitted that she was taking care of 
the apartment of X, a service member who was deployed. She logged on to his 
computer and completed applications for credit cards in his name from different banks. 
When the credit cards arrived in the mail, she opened the letters addressed to him, and 
attempted to use the credit cards to purchase various items without his permission. 
Applicant was asked by the government investigator what her motivation was for 
committing these offenses. She explained that she wanted money to purchase things 
she could not afford.7  
 
 While staying at X’s apartment, Applicant used his telephone and made long 
distance phone calls without his permission, totaling approximately $400 to $600. She 
also used Service member X’s checkbook without his permission and wrote checks to 
herself.8  
 
 Applicant was arrested in about March 2008 and charged with failure to identify 
Fugitive-Intent to Give False Information. In her SOR answer, she stated that the charge 
was incorrect. She did not have her driver’s license on her person at the time. She 
stated the police officer confirmed it was an incorrect charge. She stated the charge 
was later dismissed.9 
 
Applicant was arrested in June 2008 and charged with theft property by check. 
During her background interview, she told the investigator that she did not disclose this 
arrest on her SCA because she did not think she had been arrested, and she thought 
                                                          
6 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
7 Item 4. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
since it was for less than $300 she did not need to list the incident.10 In her SOR 
answer, she stated that she received a letter from the county advising her there was a 
warrant for her arrest for a bad check, and she was required to pay a fee to have the 
warrant released. She stated she went to the county office and paid the fee. She stated:  
 
I did fill out some paperwork and they took my picture. I didn’t know this 
would be considered an actual arrest and was not told by the officials at 
the time. I wasn’t put in handcuffs or actually taken to jail (which is what 
only thought arrest meant (sic)) so I just felt I was going to have the 
warrant lifted.11  
 
She stated that the charge was dismissed in July 2008.12 
 
Applicant was confronted by the investigator about an arrest in about August 
2009 and a charge for theft of service by check where she received a deferred sentence 
and six-months-probation. The sentence date was October 2012. She could not provide 
the investigator any information about this arrest and stated she hired a lawyer to 
handle all of her legal issues, but believed this could be related to her 2008 arrest. In 
her SOR answer, she stated she could not recall the actual 2009 arrest, but 
remembered being arrested in 2012. Applicant’s FBI Record reflects she was arrested 
and fingerprinted in June 2008 and charged with theft of property by check. She was 
arrested again in August 2009, for theft of service by check, and again fingerprinted. 
She was arrested in 2012, and the police discovered an outstanding warrant. In her 
SCA, she stated the warrant was for outstanding speeding tickets. She stated she later 
learned it was because she had written bad checks years ago  that she did not 
remember. She received a deferred sentence and six-months-probation. The charge 
was later dismissed.13  
 
Applicant’s explanations for failing to disclose her June 2008 and August 2009 
arrests may be plausible. However, I do not find Applicant’s explanation credible for 
failing to disclose on her SCA that she had been charged with felonies at her General 
Court-Martial. This was a significant criminal investigation and she was sentenced to 11 
months confinement. She was represented by a Defense Counsel, and it is highly 
unlikely that she was not aware that the charges against her were felonies under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice, which authorizes a maximum punishment of 
dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for five 
years. I find Applicant deliberately failed to disclose she had been charged with felonies 
                                                          
10 Item 4. 
 
11 Item 2. 
 
12 Item 2. 
 
13 Items 2, 3, 4, 5.  
 
 
5 
 
 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. I find she did not deliberately fail to disclose her June 2008 
and August 2009 arrest and charges, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a.14 
 
The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are reflected on a June 2015 credit 
report.15 Applicant admitted the collection account in SOR ¶ 3.a and indicated that it is 
no longer on her credit report. She did not provide evidence that she paid or resolved 
the debt. She admitted the collection account in SOR ¶ 3.b and stated it was scheduled 
to be paid in full in September 2016. She admitted the collection account in SOR ¶ 3.c 
and stated it was currently being paid and would be paid in full by October 2016. She 
denied the collection account in SOR ¶ 3.d and stated the balance was paid, the 
account closed, and it was removed from her credit report. She admitted the collection 
account in SOR ¶ 3.e and indicated it was scheduled to be paid in full in September 
2016. Applicant did not provide documented proof that any of these debts are resolved, 
paid, or being paid.16  
 
During her background investigation, Applicant disclosed that she had 
participated in financial counseling, had a budget, and is paying her delinquent debts. 
She indicated she was working at a part-time job to help pay her delinquent debts.17  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
                                                          
14 Item 8. This punishment is the maximum allowable for one specification of forgery. Applicant pled guilty 
to additional specifications, which would have increased the maximum sentence permitted.  
 
15 Items 2, 9. 
 
16 Item 2. 
 
17 Item 4. 
 
6 
 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14 the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 31, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
 Applicant has a history of arrests and criminal conduct from 2000 to 2012, 
including charges of deposit account fraud/bad checks; and theft of property by check. 
She also has a General Court-Martial conviction for wrongful appropriation lawful 
currency from various institutions by credit cards and writing checks to herself on 
checks that belonged to another person without his permission. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant was trusted by a fellow service member to stay in his apartment while 
he was deployed. She used his computer to apply for credit cards in his name and then 
used them to purchase items. She wrote checks to herself using his account without his 
permission. She was convicted in civilian court of misdemeanor charges for deposit 
account fraud/bad checks and then at a General Court-Martial for wrongful 
appropriation and various other charges related to her actions. She was later arrested 
for theft by check. There is sufficient reliable evidence that Applicant committed these 
offenses. After her 2012 arrest, her prosecution was deferred and she completed six-
months-probation, and the charge was dismissed. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude Applicant’s conduct happened under unique circumstances. Based on 
Applicant’s repeated criminal conduct after her General Court-Martial conviction in 
2002, I cannot find that future misconduct is unlikely to recur. Her actions cast doubt on 
her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(c) do not 
apply. I have considered that Applicant was paid restitution, complied with her 
probation, and is attending community college. I find AG ¶ 32(d) has some application, 
but those facts are insufficient to overcome the criminal conduct security concerns.  
  
 
8 
 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . . . 
 
Applicant was arrested several times and was convicted in civilian court of 
deposit account fraud, and at a General Court-Martial for numerous offenses involving 
wrongful appropriation of lawful currency and forgery with intent to defraud. Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose on her SCA that she was charged with felonies while in 
the military that led to her General Court-Martial conviction. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e) 
apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
9 
 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct 
her SCA and provided information about her felony charges before being confronted 
with the information by the investigator. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Applicant’s criminal 
offenses are not minor and are of the type that raise serious questions about her 
honesty and whether she can be trusted. The same analysis under the criminal conduct 
guideline is applicable under the personal conduct guideline. Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose that she had been charged with felonies while serving in the military. 
The government relies on those holding security clearances to disclose information 
requested. Applicant’s deliberate omission on her SCA is a serious offense and casts 
doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There is insufficient 
evidence to apply AG ¶ 17(c). . 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
three are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of unresolved delinquent debts that she has been unable 
or unwilling to satisfy. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
10 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant stated during her interview that she participated in financial counseling 
and had a budget. She did not submit evidence confirming that statement. Despite 
acknowledging the delinquent debts in her answer to the SOR and during her 
background investigation, she failed to provide supporting evidence that the debts are 
paid, settled, being resolved. There is no evidence that her financial problems are under 
control. There is insufficient evidence to determine that the debts were beyond her 
control or that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. She provided no 
evidence of good-faith efforts to repay creditors or document a legitimate dispute of a 
debt. None of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
11 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, E, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 40 years old. She has a history of criminal conduct involving theft by 
check and a General Court-Martial conviction that involved applying for credit cards in a 
person’s name without his permission and writing checks on his account without his 
permission. These serious offenses raise questions about her honesty and 
trustworthiness. Her deliberate failure to disclose that she was charged with felonies, 
along with her failure to resolve her delinquent debts raises security concerns. The 
record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b-2.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.f:  Against Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
