 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 16-03771 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, 
and Guideline E, personal conduct. He established that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security that he be granted access to classified information. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
The new AGs became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not 
affect my decision in this case.  
 
 Applicant initially answered the SOR on February 14, 2017, but his answer was 
not complete. He answered the SOR again on March 13, 2017, and requested a 
hearing. The Government indicated it was ready to proceed on April 3, 2017. On May 
11, 2017, the assigned administrative judge scheduled the hearing for June 7, 2017. 
 
  On May 26, 2017, Applicant’s counsel entered appearance and requested a 
continuance, which was granted on May 31, 2017. The case was then transferred to 
me. On June 19, 2017, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for 
August 2, 2017. The hearing convened as scheduled.  
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7. Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through R. All exhibits were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and called three witnesses.  
 
 Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 2.a, and 2.b.2 For SOR ¶¶ 1a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e, 
he admitted the allegations but denied that he was guilty.3 He denied ¶ 2.c. He did not 
answer ¶ 2.d, a cross-allegation. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of 
fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 29 years old. He has never married and has no children. He works in 
information technology (IT) support for a defense contractor on a U.S. military base. He 
has worked in the field since May 2011, and has worked in the position, for different 
employers, since February 2013. Applicant provides IT support for general officers and 
high-level defense department civilians. He submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA) in November 2015. (Tr. 36, 44-46, 94; GE 1). 
 
Applicant enlisted in the United States Marine Corps at age 17. He served on 
active duty from September 2005 to September 2009 (ages 18-22). He has held a 
security clearance since 2006. His military service record includes six counselling 
warnings and three nonjudicial punishments (NJPs) for violations of the Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ). (Tr. 25; 61-65; 89-93; GE 5, 6, 7; AE R) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s counsel confirmed that he received the new AGs before the hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 8-9)). 
 
2 For SOR ¶ 2.a, Applicant wrote, “Statement is true but it is a result of false NJPs.” 
 
3 For these allegations, Applicant wrote, “Statement is true but I deny guilt.” 
 
3 
 
 
In December 2006, Applicant received NJP for disrespectful language and 
attitude towards a noncommissioned officer (NCO), failure to obey a lawful order, and 
making a false official statement (UCMJ Articles 91, 92 & 107). (SOR ¶ 1.e) His rank 
was reduced to private (E-1) and he forfeited $646 in pay for two months. His 
punishment was suspended for six months and later vacated. (Tr. 89-91; GE 5, 7) 
 
In April 2007, and again in August 2007, Applicant received NJP for disrespectful 
language and attitude towards a non-commissioned officer. (UCMJ Article 91)  (SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.d) He forfeited pay and was given restriction and extra duty. (Tr. 89-91; GE 5, 6).  
 
Applicant ultimately attained the rank of corporal (E-4). He testified that he 
received substandard conduct marks which were below what was required to be eligible 
for reenlistment. In September 2009, Applicant received a general discharge under 
honorable conditions. (Tr. 64-65, 79-80; GE 1, 4) 
 
In 2011, Applicant sought to upgrade his discharge with the Department of the 
Navy. He asserted that poor leadership and hazing by NCOs in his unit contributed to 
his misconduct.4 He also contended that his proficiency and conduct marks were 
unjustifiably low and unfair. The Department of the Navy’s discharge review board 
considered the evidence before it, including Applicant’s service record, and disagreed. 
They declined to upgrade his discharge to honorable. (Tr. 83, GE 7) 
 
In November 2011, Applicant exchanged words with another driver as they both 
attempted to pull out of a parking lot onto a street clogged with congested traffic. 
Applicant testified that the other driver used profanity towards him. He also revved the 
engine and Applicant thought the other driver was going to ram him. Applicant showed 
the other driver that he had a firearm and said, “Don’t mess with me” before putting the 
firearm in the glove compartment. (Tr. 65-66) 
 
The other driver then pursued Applicant onto the road and followed him to his 
destination. Applicant was arrested and charged with brandishing a firearm, a 
misdemeanor. He spent the night at the police station and his parents bailed him out the 
next day. He later pleaded guilty to the charge. He received a 60-day suspended jail 
sentence, two years of unsupervised probation, and he was fined $100. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
2.a) Applicant acknowledged that he made a “stupid mistake” and testified he would 
never do it again. He also said he had never done anything like that before, or since. 
(Tr. 65-67, 73-75, 95; GE 1; GE 2; GE 7)  
 
In September 2014, Applicant was pulled over for having a defective license 
plate light. He told the police officer that he was carrying a firearm. He raised his arms 
and the officer saw that that the weapon was in a holster on Applicant’s waist. The 
officer charged Applicant with carrying a concealed firearm without a permit. He was 
tried, found guilty and fined $250. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a) Applicant testified that he was 
                                                          
4 Applicant offered similar testimony at his hearing. (Tr. 78-82; 89-92) Applicant also offered statements 
from other Marines in his unit, including NCOs and staff NCOs, in an effort to corroborate his assertions 
about the atmosphere in his unit. (AE M – AE Q)  
 
4 
 
 
unaware that his state permit to carry a concealed weapon had been suspended as a 
result of the brandishing charge. He stated that he never received notice of the 
suspension in the mail because he moved. (Tr. 67-71, 75, 95-99; GE 1; GE 2; GE 7) 
 
Applicant is a self-described firearms enthusiast. He first purchased a firearm on 
his 21st birthday. He continues to own firearms, and does not need a permit to do so 
under his state’s law. However, as a result of the second charge, Applicant has to wait 
until 2019 (five years after the offense), to reapply for a concealed weapons permit. (Tr. 
71-72, 76-77, 98-99) 
 
In November 2011, Applicant was terminated from his employment with a 
defense contractor after he failed to report to work or call to report he would be absent. 
(SOR ¶ 2.b) Applicant testified that he had a medical incident requiring hospitalization. 
His cell phone was not working because he was behind in making payments, so he was 
not able to call in sick. He was a temporary employee, so he was terminated the next 
day. (Tr. 83-84; GE 1; 7) 
 
In December 2012, Applicant was terminated by another employer for failing to 
wear a proper uniform. (SOR ¶ 2.c) He testified that after having surgery on his foot, he 
was unable to wear dress shoes, as required, because it was too painful. Instead, he 
had to wear a loose-fitting tennis shoe. He testified that his supervisor initially allowed 
him to wear different shoes, but did not support him when the issue came up with 
management. Applicant was again a temporary employee, and was terminated. (Tr. 83-
85; GE 1, 7)  
 
A co-worker of Applicant’s testified that he is trustworthy and reliable, and 
possesses very good judgment. He is also polite and peaceful. The co-worker is not 
aware that Applicant has had any problems with authority, with following rules or 
regulations, or with handling classified information. They have worked together for a 
year, and have daily professional interaction. (Tr. 35-40) 
 
Applicant’s next-level supervisor has known him professionally since she hired 
him two-and-a-half years ago. She testified that he was chosen over ten other 
applicants for his position. She spoke highly of his trustworthiness, judgment, reliability 
and professionalism. Applicant has received several positive accolades from 
supervisors and clients he assists at work. She considers him to be in the top five 
percent of her 100 employees. (Tr. 43-59)  
 
Applicant’s mother is an employee of a local defense contractor. She testified 
that her son is more mature and responsible than he was before he enlisted in the 
Marine Corps as a teenager. She testified that he helps care for his young nieces and 
picks them up from school when their mother is not able to. He assists his mother in her 
family responsibilities. (Tr. 27-29) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant submitted several letters of recommendation from supervisors who 
know him professionally. They attested to his honesty, reliability, professionalism, and 
value to the organization. (AE G, AE H, AE I) 
 
The records of the city where Applicant lived until recently show that he has no 
criminal record there. He has a driver’s license and a motorcycle license, both valid. (AE 
A, AE B)  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”13 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
13 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
6 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
During his four years in the Marine Corps, Applicant received three nonjudicial 
punishments under the UCMJ, all between November 2006 and August 2007. Applicant 
acknowledged that the SOR allegations about his NJPs were true, but he denied guilt. 
As he asserted before the discharge board, he testified that they were unjustified. I 
decline, however, to reexamine the validity of Applicant’s nonjudicial punishments here, 
especially since the Department of the Navy reviewed his service record and declined to 
upgrade his discharge.  
 
In 2011, Applicant was convicted of misdemeanor brandishing a firearm, during a 
“road rage” incident. His permit to carry a concealed firearm was suspended as a result, 
though he did not realize it. In 2014, after a traffic stop, he was convicted of carrying a 
concealed firearm without a permit (a misdemeanor). AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (b) apply to his 
NJPs and to his civilian offenses.  
 
  AG ¶ 32 sets forth the applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline J:   
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
  
 Applicant served in the Marine Corps between ages 18 and 22. He was young 
and immature and did not adjust well to military life. He was counselled numerous times 
and received three NJPs in the space of a year. Ultimately, he received a general 
discharge under honorable conditions in September 2009.  
 
 As he acknowledged more than once at hearing, Applicant made a “stupid 
mistake” when he brandished a firearm at another driver in 2011. He was not aware that 
his concealed weapon permit was suspended as a result. His 2011 and 2014 offenses 
were both misdemeanors. He has not had any arrests or charges since. He still owns 
firearms, but is now aware that he is not allowed under state law to apply for a 
concealed weapon permit until 2019.  
 
 Applicant is now 29 years old. He has been out of the Marine Corps for almost 
eight years. But for the offense at SOR ¶ 1.a, he has not had any trouble with the law 
for almost six years. He is highly regarded by both co-workers and supervisors. He has 
earned their trust and the significant responsibility he has to the clientele he serves. He 
also has matured and has learned to exercise better judgment and to control his 
impulses. AG ¶¶ 32(c) and (d) apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
 
8 
 
 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may 
not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
    (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 Applicant had several NJPs while serving in the Marine Corps, and he received a 
general discharge under honorable conditions. He has two more recent misdemeanor 
convictions. He has a pattern of rule violations and inappropriate behavior. AG ¶¶ 16(c) 
and 16(d)(2) and (3) apply. 
 
 With respect to SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c, I find that Applicant gave reasonable 
explanations for his actions that led to the terminations. I do not question the 
reasonableness of his employers’ decisions to terminate him. However, I find that, given 
his explanations, Applicant’s underlying actions do not constitute disqualifying conduct. 
Alternatively, I find that that these SOR allegations are mitigated by the passage of time, 
especially when balanced against Applicant’s excellent track record at his current 
position.  
 
AG ¶ 17 sets forth the applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E:   
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 The above mitigating conditions fully apply for the same reasons set forth under 
Guideline J, above.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. I found Applicant a credible 
witness. He has matured, not only since his days in the Marine Corps, but in the years 
since. He has learned from the serious mistake he made in 2011, and I do not believe 
he will act that way again. I was particularly impressed by the testimony of Applicant’s 
supervisor, who stressed that he is quite highly regarded at his job, and has earned the 
professional trust he has been given. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2: Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d:   For Applicant    
       
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
