KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Hearing Office should verify whether Applicant received a complete and accurate
copy of the hearing transcript and, if such action did not occur, take appropriate corrective
action. Furthermore, the Judge should issue a new decision that clarifies whether Applicant
received a complete and accurate copy of the transcript and ensures the faulty transcript was not
considered in rendering his decision. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 16-01209.a1
DATE: 08/16/2017
DATE: August 16, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-01209
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
8, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On June 2, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant asserts that the hearing transcript that he received contains errors.  In his appeal
brief, he provided a copy of the hearing transcript he received.  It shows the cover sheet and next
page are for his hearing, but the remainder of the transcript are pages from another person’s hearing. 
Applicant has demonstrated error that warrants remand.  The Hearing Office should verify
whether Applicant received a complete and accurate copy of the hearing transcript and, if such
action did not occur, take appropriate corrective action.  Furthermore, the Judge should issue a new
decision that clarifies whether Applicant received a complete and accurate copy of the transcript and
ensures the faulty transcript was not considered in rendering his decision.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan      
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy        
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
