 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03571 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 14, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2017. 
Applicant requested an expedited hearing and waived the 15-day hearing notice 
requirement.2 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on June 14, 2017, scheduling the hearing for June 28, 2017.  
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government’s discovery letter and 
exhibit list were appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through O, which were admitted in evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2017.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, but denied that they presented a 
security concern under Guideline B.3 Applicant is a 29-year-old technical advisor 
employed by a defense contractor since March 2015. She has never held a DOD 
security clearance.4  
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen and resident. She obtained a high-school 
diploma in the United States in 2006, a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university in 
2010, and a master’s degree from a Swedish university in 2013. She is married to a 
Danish citizen and does not have any children. She and her husband recently 
purchased their residential condominium in the United States in February 2017.5 
 
 Applicant met her Danish husband in the United States in August 2008, when he 
spent a semester studying as a foreign exchange student at the same university 
Applicant was attending. After Applicant graduated in May 2010, she moved to 
Denmark to join him. They married in January 2015. In Denmark, Applicant worked for a 
United Nations organization and attended school for her master’s degree. She did not 
become a Danish citizen. In March 2015, Applicant moved back to the United States 
after accepting a position with her current employer. In February 2016, Applicant’s 
husband obtained a permanent U.S. resident card through Applicant’s sponsorship and 
moved to the United States. Applicant’s husband is aware she is applying for a DOD 
security clearance.6   
 
                                                          
2 Directive, E3.1.8. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to the SOR.  
 
4 The DOD revoked Applicant’s interim DOD security clearance when it issued the SOR. Tr. at 14-57; GE 
1-2; AE A-O.  
 
5 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
6 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law, stepmother-in-law, mother-in-law, stepfather-in-law, and 
brother-in-law are Danish citizens. Applicant’s father-in-law is 60 years old and her 
stepmother-in-law is 51 years old; they reside in Belgium. Applicant’s mother-in-law is 
55 years old, her stepfather-in-law is 60 years old, and her brother-in-law is 30 years 
old; they reside in Denmark.7  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and stepmother-in-law are senior officials in the Danish 
government. Applicant stated that these are non-politically-appointed positions in 
Denmark, and both her father-in-law and stepmother-in-law are career government 
employees.8 
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law works for the Danish defense ministry. Her mother-in-
law and stepfather-in-law work for the municipal school system. Applicant was unsure 
whether her mother-in-law and stepfather-in-law receive any benefits from the Danish 
government as a result of their employment with the municipal school system.9  
 
 Applicant first met her husband’s family in 2009, when she traveled to Denmark 
to visit her husband. She saw her in-laws once monthly when she and her husband 
lived together in Denmark from May 2010 to March 2015. She saw her father-in-law and 
stepmother-in-law less frequently after they moved to Belgium. After she moved to the 
United States in March 2015, Applicant saw her in-laws in Denmark when she traveled 
there to visit her husband twice in 2015. She also saw her in-laws in Denmark when she 
traveled there twice in 2016. Applicant and her husband saw her in-laws in Belgium 
when they traveled there in April 2016. In July 2016, her in-laws traveled to the United 
States to attend Applicant and her husband’s wedding celebration. In early 2017, 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and stepfather-in-law visited Applicant and her husband in the 
United States. Applicant has never sponsored any of her in-laws to the United States.10  
 
 Applicant’s husband has a good relationship with his family in Belgium and 
Denmark. Since moving to the United States in February 2016, he talks to them once to 
twice monthly; Applicant will also talk to her in-laws if she happens to be present, 
though her conversations with them are limited by her non-fluency in Danish. 
Applicant’s in-laws are aware she is applying for a DOD security clearance.11    
      
 Applicant and her husband intend to make the United States their home and 
build a family here. Applicant does not plan on becoming a Danish citizen. Since moving 
to the United States in February 2016, Applicant’s husband has worked as a consultant 
at an information technology company. He plans to renew his U.S. permanent resident 
card when it expires in 2018. Their assets in the United States, which include their 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
8 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
9 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
10 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
11 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
4 
 
home and personal savings, total approximately $440,000. Aside from living in her 
father-in-law’s home in Denmark from August 2013 to February 2015, Applicant has not 
received financial support from her foreign relatives. Applicant and her husband do not 
have any foreign assets. Applicant does not have any sympathy or preference for 
Denmark as a result of her in-laws.12  
 
 Applicant’s parents and sibling are native-born U.S. citizens and residents. Her 
grandfather worked for the U.S. Government, and his work resulted in Applicant’s father 
spending much of his childhood living abroad. Her parents instilled in her a love for 
traveling at a young age. These experiences inspired Applicant to pursue a career in 
international development. Applicant was unwavering in stating that her love for 
traveling and interest in further pursuing her career in international development should 
not be mistaken as loyalty towards any other country besides the United States. Her 
friends and coworkers attested that Applicant holds herself to high ethical standards.13    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
13 Tr. at 14-57; GE 1-2; AE A-O. 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant has a relationship with her in-laws through her husband. Her father-in-
law, stepmother-in-law, and brother-in-law work for the Danish government. Her 
mother-in-law and stepfather-in-law work for the municipal school system in Denmark, 
and Applicant was unsure whether they receive any benefits from the Danish 
government as a result of their employment. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) have 
been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense  
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
 
7 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law, stepmother-in-law, and brother-in-law work for the 
Danish government. Applicant was unsure whether the employment of her mother-in-
law and stepfather-in-law in the municipal school system in Denmark results in their 
receipt of benefits from the Danish government. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not 
established for the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b).  
 
Applicant has a relationship with her in-laws through her husband. He has a 
good relationship with his family. Since moving to the United States in February 2016, 
he talks to them once to twice monthly, he and Applicant visited the family in Belgium 
in April 2016, and Applicant’s in-laws visited her and her husband in the United States 
in July 2016 and early 2017. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen and resident. She received her formal 
education in the United States. Her parents and one sibling are native-born U.S. 
citizens and residents. Her grandfather worked as an overseas employee of the U.S. 
Government, inspiring her to pursue a career in international development. Applicant 
and her husband intend to make the United States their home and build a family here. 
They have financial interests in the United States and do not have any foreign assets. 
Applicant did not become nor plans to become a Danish citizen. Through her 
sponsorship, Applicant’s husband received a permanent U.S. resident card in February 
2016 and moved to the United States. He has since worked as a consultant at an 
information technology company. He intends to renew the card when it expires. 
Applicant met her burden to demonstrate that she would resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
