 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01029 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephanie Rapp-Tully, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 29, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to an administrative judge on 
February 23, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on March 22, 2017, scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2017. At the 
request of Applicant’s counsel2 and with no objection from the Government, the 
administrative judge granted a continuance. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 
12, 2017, scheduling the hearing for June 28, 2017. The case was transferred to me on 
June 6, 2017, due to the previous administrative judge’s scheduling conflict. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled. 
  
The Government’s and Applicant’s exhibit lists were appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 and A, respectively. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted in evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is 35 years old. He has worked for 
his current employer, a defense contractor, since September 2011. He obtained a high-
school diploma in May 2000. He served honorably in the U.S. Marine Corps from 
November 2000 to December 2003, during which time he deployed to Iraq for three and 
a half months in 2003. He worked for a previous defense contractor from January 2004 
to September 2011. He has never been married. His one child, age 12, lives in another 
state with the child’s mother. He has held a DOD security clearance since 2004.3  
 
 The SOR alleges a $6,974 judgment entered against Applicant in 2012, a 
delinquent mortgage account that was $20,662 past due with a $160,492 balance, and 
a minor delinquent medical debt for $79. The SOR allegations are established by 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports.4  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems started in late 2007, when cancer recurred for his 
child’s mother and she consequently lost her job. As her insurance has not agreed to 
pay for a costly surgery, she has since been on medication and held only sporadic 
employment. In addition to paying for his own household expenses as well as child-
related expenses, Applicant has significantly contributed to paying her household 
expenses.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a comprises the largest of Applicant’s delinquent debts, and is the 
primary mortgage on the home Applicant purchased in November 2008. Applicant 
                                                          
2 AE A. 
 
3 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1, 6; AEs B, E. 
 
4 SOR; Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1-6; AEs C, D, F, G. 
 
5 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1, 6; AE F. 
 
 
3 
 
stated that he first became delinquent on his mortgage shortly upon purchasing the 
home, after his child’s mother lost her job, but he was able to bring the account current. 
He stated that between 2010 and 2012, he unsuccessfully worked with a company to try 
to obtain a loan modification. He paid the company $1,200, but the company went out of 
business.6   
 
Applicant became delinquent again on his mortgage in late 2014. He stated that 
he attempted to obtain a loan modification and began working with an attorney, referred 
to him by a friend, in March 2015 to assist him with doing so. He stated that the attorney 
required a $2,500 payment before they could begin the loan modification process, and 
he made payments to the attorney totaling $1,545. On the attorney’s advice, Applicant 
stated that he stopped paying his mortgage during the loan modification process, but 
believed he made several trial payments until his attorney told him to stop because the 
creditor was billing Applicant an amount different than what the creditor had discussed 
with the attorney. Applicant believed his attorney was renegotiating the terms of the loan 
modification. Applicant stated that he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in June 2016 because 
the attorney told him that doing so would help Applicant resolve his delinquent 
mortgage. Applicant stated that he made three payments towards the Chapter 13 
bankruptcy plan, but was unaware why it was dismissed in July 2016.7 
 
 Applicant stated that he learned his home was foreclosed in late April 2017, 
when he pulled a copy of his credit report. Prior to the foreclosure, Applicant stated that 
his attorney received notice of the foreclosure but told Applicant to disregard it. After the 
foreclosure, when Applicant discussed with the attorney the option of resolving his 
delinquent mortgage through a short sale of the home, Applicant stated that he stopped 
hearing from the attorney. Despite Applicant’s attempts to contact the attorney, 
Applicant stated that he had not heard from the attorney as of the date of the hearing.8 
 
AE D is an April 2017 mortgage account summary that reflects a total amount 
due of $195,863 and a reinstatement amount of $41,468. AE G reflects that the creditor 
purchased Applicant’s home at a foreclosure sale in late April 2017 for $88,920, and 
$195,628 was due under the note and deed of trust as of the sale. One of Applicant’s 
most recent credit reports from June 2017, in AE C, reports this debt as $43,717 past 
due with a $160,492 balance.9  
 
As of the hearing date, Applicant stated that he was in communication with the 
creditor, and he was living in the home with the creditor’s knowledge. He has not made 
any payments on his mortgage since the home was foreclosed. He stated that he had 
not received notice of any outstanding debt since the foreclosure sale, nor had he 
received an IRS Form 1099-C or IRS Form 1099-A indicating that this debt was 
                                                          
6 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1-6; AEs C, D, F, G. 
 
7 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1-6; AEs C, D, F, G. 
 
8 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1-6; AEs C, D, F, G. 
 
9 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1-6; AEs C, D, F, G.  
 
4 
 
canceled or he is not responsible for any deficiency balance. He stated that as of the 
hearing date, he had unsuccessfully attempted to contact the creditor but was 
transferred to various departments and was unable to speak to someone. He stated that 
he is of the understanding that the creditor is in the process of determining whether to 
resell the house back to him or require him to move out. Applicant did not provide 
documentation of his efforts to resolve this debt.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a minor delinquent medical account of $79. Applicant stated that he 
had an accident in 2012, and all of his consequent medical bills were paid through 
workman’s compensation with help from an attorney. He stated that he was unaware 
this medical bill was outstanding and plans to pay it, though his attempts to locate the 
creditor were unsuccessful. He stated that he last tried to locate the creditor in 2016.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a $6,974 judgment entered against Applicant in 2012 by his 
homeowner’s association for delinquent homeowner dues. Applicant stated that he was 
unaware the homeowner’s association obtained a judgment against him. He stated that 
he unsuccessfully attempted to make a payment arrangement for his homeowner dues 
before the delinquent balance reached $6,974, and made some payments between 
2012 and 2014, but the association would not work with him to reach a payment 
arrangement, and he could not keep up with payments because he had to prioritize 
paying his other bills. He subsequently forgot about his homeowner dues and did not 
make any payments between 2014 and 2017. He plans to resolve the judgment with his 
tax refund.12 
 
AE F contains a February 2017 account statement and letter from the 
homeowner’s association reflecting an outstanding balance of $11,823 immediately 
due, and a monthly assessment of $135 beginning in March 2017. Applicant stated that 
AE F is from a new company managing his homeowner’s association, and he made 
some payments towards the $11,823 outstanding balance. He stated that he was still 
negotiating with the new company regarding whether he could continue paying the 
outstanding balance at $300 monthly, as agreed to by the prior company that managed 
his homeowner’s association, and not $500 monthly as he was recently billed. He also 
stated that he was negotiating with the new company regarding the monthly 
assessment. He occasionally sends payments to the homeowner’s association, and his 
last payment occurred several months before the hearing date. Applicant did not 
provide documentation of his efforts to resolve this debt.13   
 
Applicant has worked at the same location, for a prior and his current defense 
contractor, since January 2004. His coworker and supervisor describe him as an 
upstanding, trustworthy, and reliable individual. He is one of ten to twelve employees, 
                                                          
10 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GEs 1-6; AEs C, D, F, G. 
 
11 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GE 6. 
 
12 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GE 6; AE F. 
 
13 Tr. at 13-91; AE F. 
 
 
5 
 
out of 34, authorized to handle cash from clients ranging between $1,000 and $100,000, 
he has been so authorized for 10 out the 13 years that he has worked at this location, 
and he has never had any issues doing so. He has taken advantage of overtime 
opportunities at work, he also worked odd labor jobs, and he has continued to look for 
additional part-time job opportunities. He does not have a budget, but provided a 
summary of his personal financial statement in which he indicated that his monthly net 
remainder after expenses ranges from $100 to $1,000. He has not received credit 
counseling, but he has researched such options since 2007. In 2017, he received tax 
refunds totaling $9,200, but used them towards other bills instead of applying them 
towards any of the SOR debts. While he does not have any other delinquent debts, he 
acknowledged that he needs time to address the SOR debts and intends to do so.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
14 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 13-91; GE 6; AEs B, E. 
 
 
6 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a 
possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol 
abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater 
risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate 
funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
 
 
7 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s SOR debts remain unresolved. He did not provide corroborating 
documentation to show that he has tried to resolve them. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to address his 
delinquent debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Circumstances beyond his control contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not provided corroborating 
documentation of his efforts to resolve the SOR debts. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
