 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01576 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, revising the 2006 AGs. The revised AG’s apply to 
all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision on 
the newly effective AG. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 15, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) on August 25, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on 
September 11, 2016, and had 30 days to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant responded on September 11, 2016, by providing a two page typed 
statement. This response was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and it was admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Government’s documents, identified as Items 1 
through 7, were also admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned 
to me on June 1, 2017.  
 
                                      Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan. The request and the attached source documents 
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
I. All of the documents referenced in the Request for Administrative Notice and the facts 
asserted therein, are from open sources and are dated. Afghanistan has been plagued 
by corruption and human rights abuses; it is often lawless; and it has been described as 
a failed-nation-state. The United States has been at war there for over 15 years. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the HE I source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts are 
summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old interpreter-translator sponsored for a security 
clearance by a defense contractor. He has been employed intermittently for for various 
federal contractors in Afghanistan since late 2009. His specialty was Pashto and Dari 
languages. This is precisely why the United States sought Applicant out and hired him – 
for his esoteric language skills. He was born in Afghanistan and graduated from high 
school in 2000. Applicant came from a family of six children and worked since he was 
13 years old. He has contributed to his parents’ living expenses when he could.  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SCA) on 
May 5, 2013.2 He came to the United States in 2007 and stayed until 2009 working as a 
role-player sporadically. During those two years, he tried to join the U. S. Army but did 
not pass the math portion of the entrance test. So, he returned to Afghanistan again to 
work again as a translator in 2009. He next came to the United States and was 
naturalized under a special-immigrant-visa program in April 2013. He renounced his 
Afghan citizenship at that time.  
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated May 5, 2013 (Item 3) and the summary of his clearance interview by a 
clearance investigator on September 11, 2013. (Item 4) 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has never married and reports no children. Applicant’s parents and 
most of his siblings, all live in Afghanistan. Applicant has little contact with them. None 
are affiliated with the Afghanistan government, or any other foreign government. They 
know about Applicant’s translator services, but tell others that he is working in another 
country. In his clearance interview, Applicant stated that he intended to sponsor his 
parents and siblings to come to the United States.3 Also, he does not feel that his family 
members in Afghanistan are under any threat, and he was never approached for 
classified or sensitive information at any time by any person. Applicant has no 
sympathy, preference for, or alliance with foreign nationals.  
  
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under Guideline B, SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.e, in his Answer to the SOR of June 2016. In his response to the FORM, he stated 
that he sent his father approximately $10,000 between 2010 and 2013 via Western 
Union because his father was unemployed. However, he “overlooked” the question in 
Section 20A of his SCA, Foreign National Support, because he did not understand it. He 
never considered his family members to be foreign nationals. Thus, he denied the 
falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. He also admitted in his response that he sent 
approximately $2,000 to a female friend from Kyrgyzstan over a two-year period (2012 
to 2014) because she was not earning enough to support herself. He met her when she 
was working as a masseuse at the barbershop on a U.S. military base in Afghanistan in 
2012. They dated, and she returned to Kyrgyzstan in 2013. They broke up in 2015 and 
have had no contact since then.4 Applicant also sent $500 to his roommate’s father in 
Afghanistan for transportation at one time.   
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 1, at 1. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
5 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Afghanistan is continuously at war and continues to have human rights problems, 
rampant corruption, and terrorist attacks. It remains a safe haven for terrorism, and has 
been for at least 15 years. Applicant’s foreign contacts may create a potential conflict of 
interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States ;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.5  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 2007. He became a U.S. citizen in 2013. 
He intends to sponsor his family members to become U.S. citizens. Applicant has gone 
in harm’s way repeatedly over the last eight years, and supported the U.S. military in a 
war zone. He has longstanding relationships and loyalties here. Although he has 
provided financial support to foreign citizens in the past, it was de-minimis and 
reasonable under the circumstances. He is gainfully employed by a federal contractor 
and appears to be a solid citizen. He continues to have only fleeting, occasional contact 
with his family members in Afghanistan. There is no indication that they are affiliated 
with the Afghanistan government or intelligence services. His siblings know about his 
interpreter services and are not vulnerable to foreign coercion or exploitation. Applicant 
is committed to his new life here. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) are applicable to the 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
7 
 
Afghanistan family members and girlfriend foreign contacts, which are alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. Because Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan are minimal and 
inconsequential, I find that all foreign influence concerns have been mitigated.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure 
to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following normally will 
result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security 
forms or releases, cooperation with medical or psychological 
evaluation, or polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions 
 of investigators, security officials, or other official representatives  
in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
 
17. Conditions that could potent ia l ly  mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
 
8 
 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant overlooked or misunderstood the question in the SCA in 
section 20A about foreign contacts. He was hired precisely because of his Pashto 
and Dari language skills that are indigenous to people who were born and raised 
and have family in Afghanistan. He was not trying to hide these family-member 
contacts, or his Afghanistan roots. They are the reason why he was hired. He 
sent financial support to his unemployed father and girlfriend for subsistence 
only. I find that his conduct in taking care of family members, and oversight in not 
disclosing it, has no national security significance or concern. Applicant lacked 
any specific intent to falsify his SCA.   
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines.  
 
 
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – e:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                        For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph a:                                       For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
         ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
