 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 16-01398 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the financial security concerns related to delinquent student 
loans and a 2010 bankruptcy. National security eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 22, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) for 
re-investigation. On September 26, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG 
were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
Although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG, my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On October 24, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On February 13, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me. On April 28, 
2017, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, scheduling the hearing for May 19, 2017. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant 
testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through I. All exhibits were admitted. Applicant’s wife 
also testified. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 24, 2017. The record 
remained open until June 26, 2017, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted AE J, which was admitted without an objection.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the five allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. (Answer.) His 
admissions are incorporated into these findings. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and married for nine years. He and his wife have two 
young children. He enlisted in the military reserves after graduating from high school in 
2005. He earned an associate’s degree in 2008. He received an honorable discharge in 
2013 as an E4. He received medals and commendations during his service and while 
deployed. (Tr. 16-19; AE J.) He has held a clearance since enlisting in the military. He 
began working for his current employer in 2011. (Tr. 19-20.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from June 2015, July 2016, and May 2017, 
the SOR alleged a 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and four student loans totaling $70,700, 
which became delinquent in 2014. (GE 3, GE 4, and GE 5.) Applicant explained that he 
and his wife filed bankruptcy because after he returned from a deployment in 2009, he 
was unemployed for three to six months and did not have money to pay bills and student 
loans. (Tr. 24, 36.) The bankruptcy discharged about $10,000 of delinquent debts. (Tr. 
35; AE I.) Subsequently, he was unemployed for about six months in 2011 after being laid 
off from a position. Later, he could not afford a $500 monthly student loan payment. (Tr. 
24, 36, 41.) 
 
 In January 2017, Applicant began a payment plan for three student loans: ¶ 1.b 
($36,885); ¶ 1.c ($19,610); and ¶ 1.d ($11,344). He is paying $75 per month toward the 
three loans. He provided proof that he made those payments in January, February, March 
and April, 2017. (AE C.) Applicant paid the loan in ¶ 1.e ($2,861) in May 2017. (AE A.) 
Although not alleged, he provided proof that he resolved another student loan in 
November 2016 for $1,000. (AE F.)  
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $34,000 and his wife’s salary is $35,000. They use an 
online website for budgeting. (AE J.) He participated in credit counseling, which was 
required by the bankruptcy court before filing a Chapter 7 in 2010. He has filed and paid 
federal and state income tax returns for the past five years. He does not owe any taxes. 
(Tr. 21-23.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Finally, as 
emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination under this order 
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also 
Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts prior to 2010, when he filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Subsequently, he was unable to satisfy or resolve student loan 
debt that began accumulating. The evidence raises the above security concerns, and 
shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt problems began in 2009 after he returned from a 
deployment and was unemployed for several months. In 2011, he experienced another 
period of unemployment and was unable to pay debts and stay current on student loans. 
Those were circumstances that contributed to his financial problems and were beyond 
his control. However, in order to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
needed to demonstrate that he acted responsibly while the problems were arising. There 
is insufficient evidence of that. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
  
 Applicant participated in credit counseling as a requirement for filing bankruptcy in 
2010. There are clear indications that Applicant’s student loans are coming under control, 
as evidenced by his resolution of two loans and the initiation in January 2017 of a 
repayment plan for three loans. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant is making a good-faith effort 
to adhere to the payment plan he established. The evidence establishes mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d) as to those loans.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 31-year-old man, 
 
 
6 
 
 
who served in the military reserves from 2005 to 2013. He has worked for a defense 
contractor since 2011. After returning from a deployment in 2009, he was unemployed for 
several months and was unable to pay expenses and student loans. He subsequently 
filed a bankruptcy and discharged about $10,000 in 2010. In 2016, he paid off a $1,000 
student loan, not alleged in the SOR. In 2017, he paid off the $2,861 student loan alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e and began making payments on the $66,500 balance he owes. Based on 
his recent actions and family income, I have no concern that he will fail to make payments 
on the plan he negotiated. He is aware that further financial delinquencies will jeopardize 
his security clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant met his 
burden of persuasion to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a though 1.e:  For Applicant 
                    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                  
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
