 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01781 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 23, 2015. 
(PSI) After considering the information from the PSI, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On June 
13, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2016. He admitted two of the alleged 
delinquent debts (SOR 1.a, and 1.b), and denied the third (SOR 1.c). In his answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated he made payments on the debt at SOR 1.a since February 
2015, and he had paid the debt at SOR 1.b. He also noted that the creditor for the debt 
at SOR 1.c cancelled the debt and provided him a tax form 1099-C, which he claimed 
as income on his 2015 tax return. He requested that the matter be decided on the 
written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on September 1, 2016. (Item 7) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on September 9, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity to file objections 
and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. 
Applicant did not file a response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on August 8, 
2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
administrative judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility of 
the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I 
considered information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 29 years old. He graduated from high school in January 2007. While 
attending high school, Applicant also attended a technical school. He received a 
certificate in database administration from the technical school in May 2006. Applicant 
                                                          
1 I considered Applicant’s case under both the September 1, 2006 AGs, and the June 8, 2017 AGs. My 
decision would be the same under both AGs. 
 
3 
 
 
took courses from one on-line school from July 2007 until May 2008, and from another 
on-line school from July 2008 until June 2013. He did not receive a degree from either 
on-line school. Applicant never married but has two children that he supports. Applicant 
has been gainfully employed in a technical career field since February 2007, and as a 
senior support technician since January 2015. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated February 13, 2013; 
Item 4, PSI, dated September 23, 2015)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and a credit reports (Item 5, dated February 25, 2015; Item 6, 
dated April 19, 2016) confirms the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a student 
loan in collection for $7,516 (SOR 1.a); a medical account  in collection for $216 (SOR 
1.b); and a student loan charged off for $49,117 (SOR 1.c). Applicant listed these debts 
on his e-QIP and discussed them with the security investigator in the PSI. He admitted 
the debts in his answer to the SOR. 
 
 The student loan at SOR 1.a was opened in September 2014. Applicant has 
been making payments on the loan since February 2015. His balance on the debt in 
June 2016, when he responded to the SOR was $3,516.86. This debt is being resolved. 
(Item 2, Statement, dated June 10, 2016) 
 
 Applicant paid the medical debt at SOR 1.b in full on June 30, 2016. Applicant 
saved the funds to make the payment, but had to wait until the creditor notified him of 
the exact amount owed. As soon as he knew the exact amount, he paid the debt. (Item 
2, Letter, dated June 30, 2016) 
 
 Applicant received a student loan for his first on-line program in September 2007 
for $49,117. The loan should have been deferred while Applicant was still in school. The 
creditor did not know that Applicant was taking courses at a different school. Applicant 
was not notified that the creditor started a collection action. Applicant received a notice 
from the creditor in 2014 that the loan was cancelled, and a tax form 1099-C was 
issued. Applicant contacted the creditor to determine the status of the student loan. The 
creditor was not able to accept any payments on the loan since the loan no longer 
existed. Applicant included the amount on the 1099-C in his tax year 2015 tax return. 
(Item 2, Notice, dated December 31, 2014) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
4 
 
 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admitted, that he two delinquent student 
loans and a delinquent medical debt. Adverse information in a credit report can normally 
 
5 
 
 
meet the substantial evidence standard to establish financial delinquency. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). Once the Government has established the adverse 
financial issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20 (a), (b), and (c) do not apply. Applicant 
incurred student loan debt deliberately and freely to finance his education. The student 
loans are numerous, recent, and not incurred under circumstances making recurrence 
unlikely. The financing of his education through student loans is not an unusual 
circumstance or beyond Applicant’s control. Applicant presented no evidence that he 
received financial counseling.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) does apply. Good faith means acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve 
financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant must 
establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt 
payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt 
through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a 
 
6 
 
 
track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner.  
 
 Applicant provided adequate information that he resolved, paid, or is paying all of 
his delinquent debts. He has been making payments under a payment plan for the debt 
at SOR 1.a since February 2015. He provided adequate evidence that he paid in full the 
debt at SOR 1.b. He was unable to make payments on the debt at SOR 1.c because the 
creditor charged off the debt and issued a tax form 1099-C. Applicant followed the 
correct tax procedure by including the charged off amount on his tax return for 2015. 
There is ample evidence to establish that Applicant acted responsibly by developing 
payment plans an making payments on his debts. There is clear evidence that his 
financial problems are being resolved and his finances are under control. His 
reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is a strong indication that he 
will protect and safeguard classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided sufficient credible 
documentary information to establish that he took reasonable and responsible action to 
resolve his financial obligations. Applicant demonstrated appropriate management of his 
finances and a record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. He has established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial situation.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
