 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-03495 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his repeated failure to follow security rules and regulations for the handling of classified 
and other sensitive information. His misuse of information technology systems also 
remains a security concern. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 12, 2014, due to security concerns raised by a history of security 
infractions and violations, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) revoked Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI). He did not appeal the revocation. 
 
On February 2, 2017, the CAF sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline K (handling protected information) and 
Guideline M (use of information technology).1 On March 3, 2017, Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). 
                                                          
1 The CAF’s December 2014 action did not directly impact Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. It is 
unclear from the record whether his submission of a new security clearance application in February 2015 
was triggered by the adverse SCI decision or part of the periodic reinvestigation of his background.  
 
2 
 
 On June 22, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant testified and called a longtime reference as a witness. The exhibits offered by 
the parties were admitted into the administrative record without objection.2 The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received on July 6, 2017, and the record closed on July 24, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant has been working for his employer since shortly after earning his 
undergraduate degree in 1982. He has held a security clearance for over 30 years. He 
has contributed greatly to the national defense, and is highly regarded by his employer, 
colleagues, and government client.  
 
From 2003 to 2012, Applicant was involved in a series of security infractions and 
violations, culminating in the revocation of his SCI access in 2014. He was involved in a 
subsequent violation of corporate policy in 2015, when he attempted to send proprietary 
information to his personal email account. The incidents are further described below:  
 
Failure to properly secure and account for classified information (SOR 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e).3 
 
Between 2003 and 2012, Applicant committed multiple security infractions 
involving his failure to properly secure classified safes or work areas and his failure to 
properly account for classified documents. He was counseled after each incident.  
 
In late September 2009, Applicant was issued a security violation after an internal 
audit by the company’s security office uncovered a number of improperly stored classified 
documents in a container for which he was the custodian. The documents were classified 
at a higher level than the container was authorized to store. Internal company 
documentation reflects that Applicant was given refresher security training, but Applicant 
does not recall receiving such remedial training.  
 
At hearing, Applicant explained that a former colleague, after working late one day, 
asked to place the classified documents in his (Applicant’s) container. Applicant did not 
review the documents before they were placed in the container. He testified that the 
documents had a cover sheet on them indicating that they were at the appropriate 
classification level for storage in the container. After his colleague placed the documents 
in the container, Applicant forgot about them until about a year later when the container 
was audited by corporate security. The container had last been audited by Applicant in 
January 2009, and he did not report any issues.  
 
                                                          
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 7; Applicant’s Exhibits A and B. The Government also had no objection to the 
exhibits Applicant forwarded with his Answer. These exhibits were also admitted into the record. 
Correspondence, the notice of hearing, and case management order are attached to the record as 
Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – III. 
 
3 Tr. 79-85, 95, 99-102, 112-114; Exhibit 7. The SOR also alleges an incident from 1983, when Applicant 
failed to properly lock a classified safe. This incident from over 30 years ago is not probative of Applicant’s 
present suitability, even when it is considered together with his more recent conduct. Accordingly, SOR 1.a 
is amended to delete reference to this 1983 incident.  
 
3 
 
Under questioning by Department Counsel, Applicant admitted that, as the 
custodian of the container, he was responsible for reviewing all documents before they 
were put in the container. He acknowledged failing to do so on this occasion.4  
 
2008 Security Incident – Inserting removable media containing classified information on 
an unclassified computer system (SOR 1.b and 1.c).5   
 
In about 2008, Applicant was working on a time-sensitive classified project. He 
inserted a computer disk marked “secret" into an unclassified computer system at work 
and copied its classified contents. He did so because the software tool he needed to fix 
an issue was only available on the unclassified system. He explained that going through 
the proper channels to get the software tool put on the classified system would have likely 
delayed the project by several months. Applicant admits that, at the time, he understood 
his actions constituted a security violation. He did not report the violation.6 This security 
violation was uncovered in 2012, when the Air Force Office of Special Investigations 
(AFOSI) interviewed Applicant following a separate security incident. 
 
The classified information remained on Applicant’s work computer for some time, 
including during and after a suspected security breach (hack) of his employer’s computer 
systems by a third party in 2009. By the time of the hack, Applicant had been issued a 
new computer by his employer. However, Applicant’s old computer, which contained the 
classified information, remained operable and was likely still connected to his employer’s 
unclassified information systems. The file containing the classified information was not 
compromised during the hack. 
 
2009 Security Incident – copying classified information onto removable device 
(SOR 1.c).7  In approximately 2009, Applicant copied some information from his work 
computer onto a thumb drive. He then transferred the information to an internet-enabled 
laptop that his company had provided him to allow him to telework. Sometime later, when 
reviewing the material, Applicant discovered that one of the copied documents was 
marked “secret.” Applicant reviewed the document and did not believe that it contained 
any classified material. He suspected that a junior engineer on his team improperly placed 
the secret markings on the document. Applicant knew from his annual security briefings 
that he was not authorized to remove classified markings from a document. Nevertheless, 
he removed the classified markings. He looked for the thumb drive that he had used to 
copy the files, including the secret document, but was unable to find it.  
 
Three years later, in about May 2012, when Applicant was leaving a secure 
environment, a security guard found the thumb drive in his (Applicant’s) brief case. The 
device was confiscated and turned over to AFOSI. The ensuing AFOSI investigation 
determined that the thumb drive contained about 25 classified documents. One of the 
                                                          
4 Tr. 101. 
 
5 Tr. 34-51, 95-99; Exhibit 3. 
 
6 Tr. 97. 
 
7 Tr. 51-70, 102-112; Exhibit 3.  
 
4 
 
documents, which was determined to contain classified information, was the one that 
Applicant thought had been improperly marked “secret.” At hearing, Applicant maintained 
his belief that the document was improperly marked classified by the junior engineer. 
 
Applicant consented to an AFOSI search of his office, home, vehicles, and 
computers. He admitted during AFOSI interviews that he was not authorized to have the 
thumb drive in the secure environment. He also admitted to removing the classified 
markings from the document marked “secret,” which the AFOSI found on his computer.  
 
Applicant also consented to AFOSI administered polygraphs, which found “no 
deception indicated” to relevant questions, including regarding whether he had given 
classified information to unauthorized persons. Federal prosecutors declined to bring 
criminal charges against Applicant.   
 
2012 Security Violation – unauthorized disclosure (SOR 1.f).8  
 
In approximately February 2012, Applicant was giving a classified briefing. He was 
asked a question by one of the participants at the briefing and, in responding to the 
question, Applicant revealed information that was at a higher classification level than the 
clearance level of the briefing. An internal security investigation determined that classified 
information was compromised, and Applicant was issued a security violation. He was 
provided remedial security training. (It is unclear from the record whether this remedial 
training occurred before or after the security incident in May 2012, when the unauthorized 
thumb drive was discovered in Applicant’s brief case as he exited a secure environment.)  
 
2015 Attempted Mishandling of Sensitive (corporate) Information.9  
 
In approximately July 2015, Applicant tried to send a document containing 
corporate proprietary information, marked “ITAR (International Traffic and Arms 
Regulation) controlled, non-exportable,” from his work email to his personal email 
account. He did so in order to work on the material at home. The email was not delivered 
because of its size. Applicant was counseled for violating company policy.  
 
Applicant regrets his past mistakes in mishandling classified and sensitive 
information. He promises not to engage in similar conduct in the future. He has not had 
access to classified information since approximately 2013 or 2014.10 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
                                                          
8 Tr. 85-88, 104; Exhibit 6. 
 
9 Tr. 106-112, 115; Answer. 
 
10 Tr. 78, 92-94, 107. 
 
5 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).11  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14.12 Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses 
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). See also App. Exh. I (May 2017 emails from the parties noting their 
positions that the new guidelines apply in this case). 
 
12 See also ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017) (favorable decision reversed because 
Department Counsel failed to present evidence to substantiate allegation that was denied by applicant); 
ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (rejecting Department Counsel’s argument that an 
adverse decision can be based solely on non-alleged conduct). 
 
6 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The heightened security concern raised in a case involving a security violation(s) 
is explained at AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information,  and proprietary  information-raises doubt about 
an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and 
ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.13 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 34(a): deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited . . . persons present at 
seminars, meetings, or conferences; 
 
AG ¶ 34(b): collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized 
location;  
 
AG ¶ 34(c): loading, . . . storing, transmitting, or otherwise handling 
protected information . . . on any unauthorized equipment or medium; 
 
AG ¶ 34(e): copying or modifying protected information in an unauthorized 
manner designed to conceal or remove classification or other document 
control markings; 
 
AG ¶ 34(g): any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified 
or sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 34(h): negligence or lax security practices that persist despite 
counseling by management; 
                                                          
13 See also ISCR Case No. 10-04911 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2011) (“Once it is established that an applicant 
has committed security violations, he or she has a ‘very heavy burden’ of persuasion that he or she should 
have a clearance. Security violations ‘strike at the heart of the industrial security program.’”) 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 35(a): so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has 
happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 35(b): the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial 
security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of security responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant has repeatedly failed to comply with rules and regulations for the proper 
handling and safeguarding of classified information. Although some of his security-
significant conduct can be ascribed to good intentions gone wrong, he was keenly aware 
at times that his actions were in direct contravention of security rules and regulations. He 
not only failed to report his misconduct, but took calculated steps to hide it. He left 
classified and other sensitive information out in the open susceptible to compromise, and 
for years was not even aware where he had left a thumb drive containing classified 
information. He continued to engage in serious misconduct even after receiving 
counseling, security violations, and remedial training. Applicant’s failure to reform his 
behavior led to the actual compromise of classified information. Even after being the 
subject of a criminal investigation, Applicant continued to engage in conduct that could 
have led to the compromise of sensitive information.  
 
As for the passage of time since the last reported security incident in 2012, 
Applicant failed to demonstrate that such was the result of permanent and positive 
behavioral changes. Instead, the lack of additional security incidents appears more likely 
attributable to the proactive steps Applicant’s employer took to remove his access to 
classified information. Applicant’s recent attempt to send sensitive corporate information 
to his personal email also diminishes the mitigating value of the passage of time. This 
incident strongly suggests that Applicant still does not appreciate the need to follow rules 
and regulations for the proper handling of sensitive information.  
 
In short, Applicant failed to meet his heavy burden of proof and persuasion. His 
repeated failure to abide by rules and regulations regarding the handling and 
safeguarding of classified information remains a security concern.14 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
An applicant’s failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise similar security concerns that are 
present in a Guideline K case. The misuse of information technology systems on the part 
of an applicant calls into question their reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness and 
ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and information. See generally AG ¶ 39.  
 
Here, for similar reasons discussed above, I find that Applicant’s misuse of 
information technology systems, which left classified information vulnerable to 
                                                          
14 Specifically, I find that AG ¶¶ 34 (a) through 34(c), 34(e), 34(g), and 34(h) apply. None of the mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
8 
 
compromise, also raises the Guideline M security concern. Of note, Applicant deliberately 
downloaded and stored on a removable device, a thumb drive, classified information and 
then lost the thumb drive. He never reported the security violation, nor his loss of the 
thumb drive containing the classified information, until confronted years later by criminal 
investigators after he was caught leaving a secure site with the unauthorized device. 
When the thumb drive was searched, it contained many more classified documents than 
even Applicant realized he had improperly copied onto the device.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant’s recent attempt to send sensitive corporate information to 
his personal email account, without regard to the fact that such information would be 
transmitted through unsecure means and potentially through servers located in another 
country(-ies), evidences a lack of true reform. He did so in contravention of his company’s 
internal policies. The disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 40(d), 40(f), and 40(g) apply.  
 
Although Applicant’s conduct was not done with malicious intent and, in one 
instance, he sidestepped rules because he felt pressure to complete a time-sensitive 
Government project, I find that security concerns remain. Applicant failed to show that 
similar conduct is unlikely to reoccur and, if it did, he would report it.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d) and 2(f). I hereby incorporate my above analysis 
and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for a long time and his work has contributed 
to the national defense. Furthermore, he is clearly a good, hardworking individual and 
some of his past poor decisions were likely attributable to difficult personal circumstances 
(i.e., his former wife’s death, which left him a single father raising and caring for three 
teenage children). Also, I do not question his sincerity when he expressed remorse for 
his past actions. However, the favorable record evidence is insufficient to fully mitigate 
the serious security concerns raised by Applicant’s repeated failure to comply with rules 
and regulations regarding the proper handling of classified information. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts as to his eligibility for access to classified information.15 
 
  
                                                          
15 In light of Applicant’s unique expertise and contributions, I considered the exceptions in SEAD-4, 
Appendix C. However, I agree with Department Counsel’s position that none of the exceptions are 
warranted in this case. Applicant has been provided multiple opportunities over the years to conform his 
behavior to that expected of all clearance holders and has failed to do so. See SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and Appendix 
A, ¶ 2(h); contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) (under previous version of 
the guidelines, judges had “no authority to grant an interim, conditional or probationary clearance.”)  
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
