 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02648 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing  
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was initially 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, the AGs were updated 
and cancelled the AGs effective September 1, 2006.  This decision will be decided 
based on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were to consider this case under 
the AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the same outcome.  
 
 On November 9, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
December 5, 2016. On February 15, 2017, Applicant responded to the FORM and 
provided additional documents. Her response to the FORM and attached documents 
are admitted as Item 7. Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s 
Response to FORM on April 20, 2017. (Item 8) On February 15, 2017, the FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on August 25, 2017. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
      Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c, and denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Item 1)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain her security 
clearance. She has worked for her current employer since December 2008. She has a 
bachelor’s degree and is studying for her Master’s degree. She is married and has no 
children. (Item 3)   
 
On November 2, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed that she and her husband were behind on some 
credit card bills. She noted on the e-QIP: 
 
Due to financial hardships stemming from my husband’s recent heart 
surgery, we have fallen behind on some credit cards and bills. 
Additionally, our second mortgage is “charged-off” stemming from my 
husband’s layoff in 2008. 
 
Applicant also indicated on her e-QIP application that her husband was laid off in 
2008 and unable to find work for two years. She indicated that they were behind on their 
second mortgage. Applicant said that they working to resolve the second mortgage and 
all of their debts. They worked with the mortgage company as long as they could. They 
entered into an agreement with a debt consolidation company and have successfully 
completed the program. (Item 3, section 26, at 31-32)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent 
accounts: a second mortgage had been charged off in the amount of $65,591 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Item 5 at 4); a $495 credit card account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: 
Item 5 at 4); and that Applicant was past due on her mortgage in the amount of $838, 
with a mortgage balance of $277,561. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 6). 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that in the 2008-2009 timeframe, her 
family was directly impacted by the housing crisis. Her husband was laid off for about 
two years during this same time. In 2010, they entered into a loan modification with their 
original mortgagor. They were advised not to make payments on the second mortgage 
during the modification process. Applicant claims that the modification process 
successfully combined the two loans. The second mortgage is listed as a “Deferred 
Principal Balance” that will be deferred until the maturity of their loan. Their mortgage 
will mature in 2035. At that time, Applicant and her husband will pay a balloon payment 
of $132,763 as well as the Deferred Principal balance of $65,709 for a total of $198,473. 
 
3 
 
 
After the modification was complete, they paid their mortgage payments to their original 
mortgagor. The loan was purchased by the current mortgagor that is listed in the SOR.  
(Item 2 at 1-3) 
 
Applicant denies the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. She states that both 
she and her husband had credit card accounts with the credit card company, but they 
paid both credit cards off when they attended Consumer Credit Counseling to help with 
the debt incurred while her husband was unemployed. She claims neither of them have 
owned a credit card with the alleged credit card company in over five years. A credit 
report, dated December 1, 2016, indicates that Applicant had two accounts with the 
credit card company and that both are paid and closed. (Item 4 at 3-5)  
 
Applicant admits that she and her husband were behind on their mortgage as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  Applicant says that she and her husband are making regular 
payments on their mortgage. They fell a month behind in their mortgage payment when 
her husband had surgery in May 2015 and was out of work for a few months while 
recuperating. They made arrangements to bring the mortgage current. She provided 
what appears to be an undated portion of her credit report indicating that her mortgage 
is now current. (Item 2 at 2, 4) 
 
Applicant states that she is a dedicated, hard working and trustworthy employee. 
Her financial difficulties were caused by unforeseen and unplanned circumstances 
beyond her control. (Item 2 at 2)  
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant provided further documentation that she 
is current on her mortgage. (Item 7 at 5-7). She also provided a statement indicating the 
second mortgage account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is closed. (Item 7 at 8). She also 
provided a statement that the credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was paid and 
closed. (Item 7 at 9)  
 
 Applicant says that her famiy is working very hard to get back on track with all of 
their bills. They intend to meet their current and future financial obligations. (Item 7 at 4)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
 
4 
 
 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be cause or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
 
5 
 
 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a security 
concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including espionage.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant encountered financial 
problems in 2008 during the real estate crisis which caused her and husband to get 
behind in their mortgage.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances);  
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue).  
 
AG & 20(a) and AG ¶ 20(b) apply because Applicant’s financial problems 
occurred under unusual circumstances and are unlikely to recur. Circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control contributed to the financial problems. Applicant’s husband was 
unemployed for two years, which made it difficult to meet their bills including their 
mortgage. The 2008 mortgage crisis also contributed to the problem.  Applicant was 
able to successfully apply for a mortgage modification. After the mortgage modification, 
she and her husband fell behind on the mortgage payment in 2015, as a result of her 
husband’s unanticipated surgery. He was unable to work for two months. Applicant 
demonstrated proof that her mortgage is now current. Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances that she was facing when she encountered financial problems.  
 
AG & 20(c) applies. Applicant states that she and her husband sought help from 
Consumer Credit Counseling with their bills when they were having financial problems 
and that they resolved some of their debts with the help of Consumer Credit 
Counseling. While she did not provide a copy of the agreement, her success with  
financial counseling is indicated by the lack of delinquent debt that was alleged in the 
SOR.  Numerous credit report entries not alleged in the SOR indicated accounts were 
closed and paid. Applicant took the initiative to resolve her financial situation and her 
financial problems are now under control.   
 
AG & 20(d) applies. Applicant provided proof that her mortgage account is now 
current. She has taken the initiative well before her security clearance background 
investigation to resolve her debts. Her good-faith efforts and adherence to payment 
plans resulted in her resolving several accounts that were not alleged in the SOR.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant 
disputed this $495 credit card account placed for collection. Government Exhibit 5, a 
credit report dated December 1, 2016, indicates that this account was paid.  Applicant 
also provided an excerpt from her credit report in her response to the FORM, which 
indicated that this debt was paid.   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 Applicant encountered problems in 2008 because of her husband’s two-year 
period of unemployment and the mortgage crisis. She took the initiative with her debts 
and consulted Consumer Credit Counseling Service. She resolved her delinquent 
accounts. She and her husband obtained a loan modification on their mortgage. They 
are current on their mortgage payments. There was one instance where they became 
behind on the mortgage payment because of her husband’s surgery.  The mortgage is 
now current.  Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations.  
         
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
