 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )       ISCR Case: 16-00375  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
August 15, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 9, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 14, 2016. She admitted all of the SOR 
allegations concerning her delinquent debts, and requested that her case be decided by 
an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On August 15, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was mailed to 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant and received by her on August 29, 2016. The FORM also notified Applicant 
that the Government amended the SOR to add two additional allegations under 
Guideline F, referenced as 1(g), and 1(h).  Applicant was notified that she had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. DOHA assigned the case to me on July 
11, 2017, and Items 1 through 7 are admitted into evidence.  Going forward, the 
Government’s items will be referred to as Government Exhibits.  Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM will be considered a denial.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 38 years old.  She is married with three children.  Since May 2005, 
Applicant has been working as a self-employed office manager.  Since 2016, she joined 
her husband as a truck driver working for a defense contractor.  She is seeking to obtain 
a security clearance in connection with her employment.  (Government Exhibit 4.)    
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems involving eight delinquent debts 
totaling approximately $14,344.  She claims that the debts alleged allegations 1(a), and 
1(b), are one in the same debt.  She admits each of the remaining debts.  Each of the 
debts listed in the SOR remain owing.  (Government Exhibit 3.)   
  
1(a) A delinquent medical account that was placed for collection in the amount of 
$5,910.  1(b) A delinquent medical account placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $5,685.  Applicant states that the debts in 1(a) and 1(b) are one in the same 
debt.  She states that she had made arrangements to pay $25 monthly which was to be 
deducted from her bank account in July.  Applicant states that she then lost contact with 
the bank and it has been difficult for her to stay on top of her bills.  (Government Exhibit 
3.)  The debt remains owing in Applicant’s credit reports dated August 28, 2015, and 
May 18, 2016.  (Government Exhibits 6 and 7.)   
 
 
 
3 
 
 
1(c) A delinquent medical account that was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $845.  Applicant states that she is trying to resolve the bill and plans to make 
arrangements to pay off the account.  (Government Exhibit 3.) 
   
1(d) A delinquent medical account that was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $494.  She states that she tried to dispute the debt, but did not hear anything 
from the creditor.  She further states that she has made arrangements to pay off the 
debt by the end of the month, with payments to be made on June 17, and June 24, 
2017.  (Government Exhibit 3.)   
 
1(e) A delinquent medical account that was placed for collection in the amount of $344.  
Applicant is trying to contact the creditor to resolve the debt.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  
 
1(f) A delinquent medical account that was placed for collection in the amount of $194.  
She states that she has contacted the creditor to establish a payment plan.  
(Government Exhibit 3.)   
 
 On August 12, 2017, the Government amended the SOR to add the following two 
allegations. 1(g) A state tax lien was filed against the Applicant in July 2007 in the 
approximate amount of $268.  1(h) A state tax lien was filed against the Applicant in 
October 2007 in the approximate amount of $604.  Applicant failed to respond to the 
allegations.  Applicant’s silence in response to the amendment and the new allegations 
will be considered denials.  The Government’s evidence shows that both tax liens are 
still owing.  (Government Exhibit 6.)      
  
 Applicant states that until last year, she was a stay at home mother.  Since last 
year, she has joined her husband as an over-the-road truck driver to run the sensitive 
item loads.  She enjoys her job.  Her husband and father are Marine Veterans, and she 
takes pride in working for the Government.  She states that she is making every effort to 
resolve her delinquent debts in a timely fashion.  (Government Exhibit 3) 
    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
 
 
4 
 
 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
 
 
5 
 
 
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial 
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts.   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has seven delinquent debts that have been placed in collection that 
she has not resolved. This fact establishes prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to mitigate the concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes seven conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
None of the mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 20 are applicable here.  Although 
Applicant claims that she has or is going to make arrangement to pay the creditors 
listed in the SOR.  She has failed to submit any documentation to substantiate this.  
Mere claims to have made payment arrangements to pay the creditors are not enough 
to carry her burden of proof.  There are no clear indications that her financial problems 
are under control.  Furthermore she failed to present any evidence as to why her debts 
became delinquent, how her financial situation has changed, if any, since the time of the 
delinquencies, and whether her financial situation is now stable and manageable. With 
the facts presented Applicant has not acted responsibly or in good-faith to demonstrate 
that she has done anything about her indebtedness.  The record fails to establish any 
mitigation of financial security concerns under any of the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took no reasonable and effective action to resolve the financial issues of concern to 
the Government in the SOR.  Her financial problems still exist and there is no real 
solution here.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. She has not met 
 
 
7 
 
 
her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
