KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A Judge has no authority to promise an applicant a clearance or to advise an applicant
on the quantum of evidence that would mitigate the concerns in his or her case. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 16-00420.a1
DATE: 08/07/2017
DATE: August 7, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00420
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
3, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On May 22, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant’s SOR lists several delinquent debts, for mortgage accounts, credit cards, etc. 
Applicant owned several pieces of real estate.  Due to the economic downturn in 2008, he was not
able to make his mortgage payments.  Ultimately he stopped paying on the properties and they went
into foreclosure.  He presented Form 1099-As showing that the properties had been foreclosed, but
these documents did not establish that any resulting tax obligations had been satisfied.  The Judge
stated that “the purchase and ultimate foreclosure of each property must also be considered
adversely as to Applicant’s overall financial acumen and responsibility.”  Decision at 3.  Applicant
also had significant credit card debt that he failed to pay.  He did not provide evidence that these
debts had been satisfactorily resolved.  Applicant hired a lawyer to assist him in addressing his
financial problems.  He discovered that this person was not providing adequate representation, so
he terminated the relationship.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted evidence that Applicant’s financial problems resulted from the recent
economic downturn, which was a circumstance beyond his control.  However, after discovering that
the attorney was not fulfilling his professional obligations, Applicant did not undertake responsible
action to resolve his debts himself.  The Judge stated that some debts in significant amounts are still
outstanding and that Applicant has not shown that his financial status is stable and clear.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that he submitted the Form 1099-As at the Judge’s suggestion, yet the
Judge made an adverse decision anyway.  Applicant argues that if these documents were not
sufficient to mitigate the concerns in his case, the Judge should not have recommended that he
provide them.  He also states that there is other evidence that he could have provided if the Judge
had advised him to do so.
It goes without saying that a Judge has no authority to promise an applicant a clearance or
to advise an applicant on the quantum of evidence that would mitigate the concerns in his or her
case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02806 at 3, n.1 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015); ISCR Case No. 09-
06602 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2011).  Among other things, a Judge cannot conclude that evidence
is relevant and assign weight to that evidence before he or she has seen it.  In addition, a Judge has
no authority to serve as an investigator in a case, which would be inconsistent with his or her role
as an independent fact finder.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03062 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11,  2015). 
In this case, we find no reason to conclude that the Judge did so.  During the course of Applicant’s
presentation, the Judge and Department Counsel inquired about evidence that might corroborate
some of Applicant’s testimony.  For example, Department Counsel stated during cross-examination
that Form 1099-As were documents that Applicant would want to present.  Tr. at 65.  Later, the
Judge asked Applicant if he had paid taxes on any debts that had been forgiven, and Applicant
replied that he had.  The Judge advised him that he could provide documentary proof of this along
with other evidence that he intended to submit post-hearing.  Tr. at 70-71.1  The Judge did not
promise to Applicant that if he provided any such documents he would obtain a favorable decision. 
We resolve this issue adversely to Applicant.  Beyond this, Applicant’s argument amounts to
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not enough to show that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.    See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-08842 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 2017). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved
in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
1“[Judge]: Did you ever pay taxes on the 1099s? [Applicant]: They were definitely part of my tax returns. 
Definitely. [Judge]: They were? Okay. Well, if you get them–as [Department Counsel] said–submit them to him.” 
 
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
