 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-02145 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his tax-related financial problems. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. Specifically, the SOR 
alleged that Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2012, 
2013, and 2015. 
 
On September 30, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), admitting that 
he had failed to file the tax returns for the years in question. He also provided 
documentation showing that, a few days after receiving the SOR, he filed the late 
returns. He requested a determination on the administrative (written) record. 
 
 On October 19, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). On November 28, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals received Applicant’s FORM Response.  
 
 
2 
 
 On July 1, 2017, I was assigned Applicant’s case. After receiving confirmation of 
Applicant’s continued sponsorship for a security clearance, I reopened the record to 
provide the parties an opportunity to provide updated information.1 Neither side 
submitted additional matters, and the record closed on July 28, 2017. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel offers Items 1 – 5 for admission into the administrative 
record. These exhibits were forwarded to Applicant with the FORM. Item 4 is a 
summary of Applicant’s security clearance interview. Applicant contests the 
thoroughness of the background investigation and claims the security clearance 
investigator who prepared the summary of interview was unprofessional. (Response at 
2-3.) I interpret Applicant’s comments as an objection to Item 4. Specifically, Applicant 
raises a question as to the accuracy and reliability of the exhibit, and calls attention to 
the Government’s failure to lay a proper foundation (authentication) for the exhibit’s 
admission. Applicant’s objection to Item 4 is sustained.2 Applicant did not raise any 
other objections and, therefore, the remaining exhibits (Items 1-3, and 5) are admitted.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 63, earned a bachelor’s degree in 1981. He attended college from 
2003 to 2007, but did not earn an additional degree. He was first granted a security 
clearance in 1987, and has been employed as a federal contractor since at least 2004. 
He began working for his current employer in approximately February 2013.  
 
 Applicant, in response to relevant questions, reported on his June 2015 security 
clearance application that he had not paid his 2011 federal income taxes totaling over 
$4,000. He also reported failing to file his federal income tax returns for 2012 and 2013. 
He noted that missing receipts and the complicated nature of the returns were the root 
causes for the delay, but claimed to be working on the issue to resolve it. The following 
year, Applicant did not file his 2015 tax return by the April 15th deadline.4  
 
On or about September 28, 2016, Applicant filed his 2012, 2013, and 2015 
federal and state tax returns. He admits that he filed these tax returns late. His tax 
                                                          
1 Confirmation of Applicant’s continuing sponsorship for a security clearance and the email sent to the 
parties reopening the record were marked as Appellate Exhibits I and II, respectively.  
 
2 E.O. 10865, § 5 (investigative reports (ROIs) are inadmissible in due process proceedings without an 
authenticating witness); Directive, ¶ E3.1.20 (similar). See also ISCR Case No. 15-01807 (App. Bd. Apr. 
19, 2017) (the portion of an ROI summarizing a security clearance interview is admissible unless an 
objection is raised or there is some evidence indicating the summary contains inaccurate information).  
 
3 Applicant’s Answer, to include the exhibits he forwarded with the Answer, were included with the FORM 
and marked as Item 2.  
 
4 Item 3 at 41-42. Since Applicant admits in his Answer and Response that he filed his 2015 federal return 
late, he apparently did not apply for an automatic four-month extension to file the return. Also, non-
alleged matters, such as Applicant’s failure to timely pay his 2011 federal income taxes, were only 
considered for the limited purpose of assessing mitigation and conducting a whole-person analysis. 
 
3 
 
returns indicate that his adjusted gross income for the three years in question was 
between $144,000 and $148,000. He claims that several personal and professional 
issues, notably, health concerns, as well as the complicated nature of the returns, 
negatively impacted his ability to timely file his tax returns. He, however, acknowledges 
that his failure to properly manage his finances and monitor his tax filing obligations 
were also to blame for his failure to timely file his returns.5  
 
 Applicant was able to prepare and his 2012, 2013, and 2015 tax returns using a 
commercially available tax software program. His returns indicate that he was 
supposedly owed refunds in 2012 and 2015.6 The returns also indicate that he owed 
approximately $1,600 for tax year 2013. He presented no evidence that the returns 
were accepted by the IRS, or that he satisfied the taxes owed for 2013.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
June 8, 2017, through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to 
classified information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. See e.g. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (Aug. 2, 
2017) (Board reversed favorable decision where Department Counsel failed to present 
evidence to substantiate allegations, which applicant had denied). Applicants are 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
                                                          
5 Answer (“I agree and do not deny that these 2012, 2013, and 2015 personal tax returns have been 
delinquent. Just this week, I was able to calculate and compose all three returns for submission directly to 
the IRS. . . . Admittedly, I do need to discipline my own record-keeping, financial management, and tax 
filing obligations.”) 
 
6 Applicant’s 2012 tax return and anticipated refund appears to be based, in part, on the IRS accepting his 
claim of charitable deductions (cash contributions) totaling nearly $10,000. (Item 2 at 63.) 
 
4 
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative 
judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a 
reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same 
record.” Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national 
security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held 
that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal income tax returns raises the financial 
considerations security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all pertinent disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file . . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns . . . as required; 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
 An applicant who fails to timely file or pay his or her taxes, a basic and 
fundamental financial obligation of all citizens, bears a heavy burden in mitigating the 
financial considerations security concern.7 An administrative judge should closely 
examine the circumstances giving rise to an applicant’s tax-related issues and his or her 
response to it. Furthermore, an applicant’s claim of financial reform must be weighed 
against the overriding concerns about the individual’s lack of judgment and history of 
not abiding by rules and regulations in failing to timely file or pay their taxes.8 
 
 Here, Applicant presented documentary proof the he filed his late tax returns. 
However, he did so only after receiving the SOR, which decreases the mitigating value 
that can be attached to such remedial action. Moreover, Applicant did not submit 
evidence from which I can find that his late tax filings were an aberrational event or that 
it is unlikely to reoccur. To the contrary, Applicant’s failure to timely file his 2015 federal 
income tax return after submitting a security clearance application, wherein he claimed 
to be working on resolving past tax issues, evidences a disregard for his legal tax filing 
obligation. In short, Applicant’s past failure to timely file his federal income tax returns 
continues to raise questions about his present judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Furthermore, although Applicant’s tax returns may have been complicated, such 
does not excuse his repeated failure to timely file his tax returns. He clearly earned a 
sufficient income to hire a tax professional to assist with their preparation and filing. He 
elected not to do so. Instead, he only took corrective action after it became evident that 
                                                          
7 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 14-05794 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016); 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016); ISCR Case No. 12-09545 (App. Bd. Dec. 21, 2015). 
 
6 
 
the six-figure salary he was commanding as a contractor for the federal government – a 
job dependent on maintaining a security clearance – was placed in jeopardy due to his 
failure to file his tax returns. He then, a few days after receiving the SOR, prepared and 
filed the returns by himself using readily available commercial software. Applicant’s 
ability to so quickly remedy the issue undercuts his claims that the reason for the delay 
was the tax returns purported complicated nature and points to a potentially far more 
significant underlying issue(s) for the late filing of the returns.9  
 
Under the circumstances presented by this case, I find that Applicant failed to 
establish any of the above-listed mitigating conditions. I also find that he failed to meet 
his heavy burden of proof and persuasion to continue his eligibility for a security 
clearance. The security concerns raised by his past failure to timely file his federal 
income tax returns remain. ISCR Case No. 14-02930 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (“The 
filing of tax returns is both a financial and a legal obligation. Applicant’s admitted failure 
to have done so for many years is sufficient to raise a concern that he may be unwilling 
to follow other rules and regulations, such as those that govern the handling of 
classified information.”)10 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information.11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 10-05909 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012) (judge properly considered the manner in which and 
the timing of when applicant took action to resolve financial issues in concluding that the impending 
security clearance process was the major motivating factor). 
 
10 See also ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (applicant’s resolution of alleged financial 
issue (filed overdue tax returns) was insufficient to mitigate security concerns, because no extenuating 
circumstances to explain late tax filing and lack of evidence of financial reform). 
 
11 In reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person factors in AG ¶ 2(d), including that Applicant 
has held a security clearance for over 30 years and self-reported the information at issue, as well as other 
potentially adverse information. (Item 3 at 12, 15, 41-43.) Also, in light of Applicant’s request for a 
probationary clearance, I considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C . However, I do not find 
that any of the exceptions are warranted in this case. See generally SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h); 
contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) (under previous version of the 
guidelines, judges had “no authority to grant an interim, conditional or probationary clearance.”)  
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
