1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No. 16-00287 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
August 25, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant discharged business debts through Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in 2010, 
as a result of his business going defunct after an accident occurred. Since the discharge 
in 2011, he has paid or is paying all of his debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of Case 
On March 25, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). (Item 3.) On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2016. (Item 2.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On October 24, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on October 25, 2016, and received by him on November 
8, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in an undated letter received by the 
Government on November 23, 2016. I marked his submission Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, 
and admitted it without objection. DOHA assigned the case to me on August 2, 2017. 
Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and divorced since 2002. He has two children, ages 17 
and 29. He has worked for his current employer, a Government contractor, since 
October 2014. (Item 3.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was delinquent on four debts in the total amount 
of $190,987. Additionally, he was alleged to have filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition 
in 2010, which was discharged in 2011. (Item 1; FORM.) Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.e. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. (Item 2; AE A.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleged Applicant was indebted on a June 2013 judgment in the 
amount of $138,824, as stated on an April 14, 2015 credit report. The amount was 
corrected to $1,388 in an October 2016 credit report, and was listed as “satisfied.” This 
debt is resolved. (FORM; Item 5; Item 4.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleged Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2010. His 
schedule of creditors holding unsecured claims totaled over $2,300,000. (Item 7 at 16.) 
He explained that the bankruptcy resulted from a “tractor trailer accident with his 
 
 
3 
 
 
business that resulted in a total loss of the business.” (Item 6 at 2.) The vehicle accident 
left the “business defunct.” (Item 3 at 12.) His creditors included $1,494,034 in liens 
against real property and improvements, and multiple deficiencies, which resulted from 
surrendering vehicles to the creditors. The Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged in July 
2011.1 (Item 6.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleged Applicant was indebted on a judgment for a vehicle loan in the 
amount of $32,992. This judgment was filed in June 2010. It was discharged through 
Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 2011. It is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleged Applicant was indebted on a delinquent child support 
obligation in the amount of $18,244. Applicant’s October 2016 credit report reflects the 
balance of this debt decreased to $11,699. Applicant explained he currently makes 
monthly payments of $481 toward his child support obligation. Of that payment, $100 
goes toward arears, and $381 is for the current month. His October 2016 credit report 
reflects that he successfully made his agreed payment in September 2016. Applicant is 
resolving this debt. (Item 2; Item 4 at 2; AE A.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleged Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount 
of $927. This was an outstanding business credit card debt. Applicant has been making 
payments with money orders on this account. He provided copies of multiple money 
orders he claims he sent to this creditor. His October 2016 credit report reflects that the 
balance due has decreased to $537 and that he is making $25 monthly payments on 
this account. Applicant is resolving this delinquency. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant’s October 2016 credit report reflects all of Applicant other accounts are 
resolved or are in good standing. He indicated in his Answer, “since 2010 I have paid 
my debts or made payment arrangements to satisfy any debt, I am current with all my 
creditors including my federal taxes and child support.” (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
                                                 
1 Department Counsel notes that Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing included Federal and state 
income taxes owed. Those debts were not alleged in the SOR, but are considered below for mitigation 
purposes. Applicant presented evidence that he has an installment agreement and is resolving his 
Federal tax debt. He credibly claimed he resolved his state tax debt. (FORM; AE A.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of E O 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s credit reports and bankruptcy filings documented significant 
indebtedness beginning in approximately 2010 that culminated in the discharge of more 
than two million dollars of debt. Despite receiving a discharge of those debts in 2011, 
Applicant incurred delinquent child support obligations and a delinquent credit card. The 
facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift 
the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by a commercial vehicle accident 
that caused his business to close and left him without the means to pay his financial 
obligations. He chose to exercise his legal right to file bankruptcy and discharged the 
majority of his debt in 2011. The debts that were not discharged are being repaid 
through monthly installments. Applicant’s financial problems were the result of 
conditions beyond his control, and are unlikely to be repeated. They do not cast doubt 
on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. He has acted 
 
 
6 
 
 
reasonably and responsibly under the circumstances, by setting up repayment plans 
with his remaining creditors and demonstrating a history of good faith by making the 
agreed payments. The above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his financial 
difficulties. He demonstrated responsible behavior in resolving or paying his debts and 
incurring no new delinquencies. His past delinquent debts no longer establish any 
potential for pressure, coercion, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that he met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
