 
 
 
 
1 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 16-03277 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2013 federal income tax return. He mitigated the 
resulting security concern. National security eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. This 
 
 
 
 
2 
decision applies the new Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) that came into effect on June 8, 
2017.1  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 14, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On February 8, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On March 9, 2017, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for April 5, 2017. The case proceeded 
as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 17 into 
evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2017. The record remained open until June 2, 2017, to give 
Applicant time to submit additional information. He submitted two exhibits that I marked 
as AE 18 and AE 19, and admitted into the record without an objection from Department 
Counsel.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old and married for eight years. He and his wife have one 
child and he has two stepchildren with her. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1994 and 
completed a certificate program. Since June 2013, he has worked for his current 
employer. Prior to this position, he worked for another defense contractor for about eight 
years. He has held a security clearance since 2005 and a position of trust position for two 
years. He coaches a community program for children. (Tr. 19-25, 31.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to timely file his 2013 federal income tax 
return. Applicant admitted that allegation. He filed the return on December 14, 2016, along 
with a request for a payment plan. About a month later, the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) returned Applicant’s income tax return because he and his wife had not signed it. 
They signed and sent it back in February 2017. Applicant said he forgot to sign it because 
he normally filed his returns electronically. (Tr. 38-39; AE 4, AE 6.)   
 
 On April 3, 2017, Applicant made a first payment on the monthly repayment plan. 
He owes the IRS $4,380 for unpaid taxes for 2013.2 He paid the monthly amount of $100 
and a user fee. (Tr. 42, 44; AE 2, AE 3, AE 5.) He made $100 payments in May and June 
2017. (AE 18, AE 19.) He intends to make monthly payments until the tax is paid. (Tr. 36.) 
His filed his federal and state tax returns for years 2012, 2014, 2015, and 2016 on time. 
He received refunds from the IRS for years 2012, 2014, 2015, and 2016. He owes state 
income taxes for 2016 in the amount of $450. He has not established a repayment plan 
for that, but intended to pay the debt soon. (Tr. 28-23, 37.) 
 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was decided under the previous AG. 
 
2 The SOR did not allege that Applicant failed to pay his 2013 federal taxes as required. Hence, that 
information will not be considered in the analysis of disqualifying conditions. It may be considered in the 
analysis of mitigating conditions, the whole-person concept, and Applicant’s credibility. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant’s tax accountant timely prepared his 2013 federal and state returns.  
Applicant filed the state return, but did not file the federal return. There appears to have 
been miscommunication between Applicant and his accountant about filing the federal 
taxes and including a payment with it. In March 2015, Applicant learned that his 2013 
federal taxes had not been filed when he inquired about filing his 2014 returns. (Tr. 34-
35, 47; AE 8.) 
 
 Although he knew in March 2015 that his 2013 federal return had not been filed, 
Applicant waited until December 2016 to file his 2013 federal return because he was 
fearful and uncertain. He did not have enough money to pay the unpaid taxes or penalties. 
(Tr. 35.) He admitted that he and his wife procrastinated and did not take responsibility 
for managing their financial obligations. (Tr. 36.) He acknowledged that receiving the SOR 
and the reinvestigation of his security clearance motivated him to resolve his tax issue. 
(Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant submitted letters of recommendation, certificates of achievement, and 
merit commendations. (AE 11, AE 15, AE 16.) Applicant’s human resource department is 
aware of his financial issue; however, its director stated that they are not aware of any 
security violations by Applicant since he began working in 2013. (AE 10.) The company’s 
chief of staff complimented Applicant on his commitment to excellence, as did others who 
work with him. (AE 12, AE 14, AE 17.) His 2016 performance evaluation gave him a 4.6 
rating out of a 5.0 scale. (AE 13.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Finally, 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 sets forth the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
 Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from 
criminal activity, including espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant admitted that he failed to timely file his 2013 federal tax return until 2016. 
The evidence established the above disqualifying condition. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 20 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 There is evidence to establish some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant failed 
to timely file his 2013 federal tax return, but timely filed his federal returns for 2012, 2014, 
2015 and 2016. He timely filed his state tax returns for 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016. 
Other than this instance, he does not have history of failing to file federal or state tax 
returns.   
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant honestly 
admitted that the circumstances leading to his failure to file his 2013 federal tax return 
were within his control. He accepts responsibility for the mismanagement of his taxes. 
The evidence establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(g). Although he waited 
over two years to file his 2013 tax return and did so after receiving the SOR, Applicant 
has made three payments to the IRS on his 2013 tax liability. He credibly asserted that 
he intends to pay his taxes until they are resolved. He is demonstrating compliance with 
his installment agreement.  
  
Analysis 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances, commonly referred to as the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should also consider the following nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
 
 
6 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) 
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c) the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible and educated 54-
year-old man. He has successfully worked for a defense contractor since 2013, as 
documented by recent letters of recommendation and a performance evaluation. He is 
dedicated to his current job. He testified candidly and humbly. He admitted his conduct 
and takes responsibility for it. There is no evidence in the record which would lead me to 
believe he will not continue to pay the installment agreement he has with the IRS. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s judgment and 
suitability for a security clearance at this time. He met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                             
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
