 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-02040 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline H, drug involvement. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are 
effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 18, 
2016. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant did not provide a 
response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. 
The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. She earned an associate’s degree. She is not married 
and has no children. She has worked for her present employer, a federal contractor, 
since June 2015, and also has been self-employed from March 2014 to the present.  
 
 Applicant admitted that she used the drugs Valium and Xanax, controlled 
substances, without a prescription on various occasions from January 2010 to April 
2015. She admitted she used Vicodin, a controlled substance, without a prescription, at 
least four times in about February 2014. This drug was prescribed for her father’s use. 
She admitted she was terminated from employment in September 2012 for violation of 
the company’s drug policy.2 
 
 Applicant used Valium and Xanax when she was under stress due to a death in 
her family, before giving a speech at school, and for tests and situational anxiety. She 
used Vicodin after she sustained an injury. She stated her father gave her the drugs. 
She took it for 36 hours and sought medical help on the third day after her injury.3 
 
 In Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA), she stated, “I prefer to 
employ more holistic methods for test anxiety and general stress management. I have 
incorporated valerian root into my diet and have received acupuncture treatments in 
order to manage stress.”4 She intimated that her father gave them to her and she did 
not question him or solicit them. She did not elaborate. She was an adult, age 22 
through 27 years old at the time.5 
 
                                                          
2 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 Items 2, 3. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated, “I do not intend or never intended to 
take the drug for recreational use. The side effects are often overwhelming and would 
prefer to not take any opiates unless it was in the case of extreme pain.”6 
 
 Applicant was terminated from her employment in 2012 due to a 
misunderstanding. She did not feel well at work and an ambulance was called. The 
paramedics asked her if she had taken anything unusual in the past 24 hours. She told 
them she took “valerian.” Her employer terminated her the next day for violating the 
company’s drug policy. Applicant explained that “valerian” is a herbal root used to 
regulate sleep patterns.7 She asked her employer for a drug test, but her request was 
denied. She stated that her sickness was caused by a reaction to the substance. 
 
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent medical/health care debts ranging from $52 to 
$5,387, and totaling approximately $17,452 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.n). They are 
corroborated by credit reports from October 2015 and June 2015, which show the 
delinquencies began in 2013. She also has a delinquent debt with a retail store that has 
a past due balance of $203. In her SCA, Applicant stated that some of her medical 
debts “were meant to be absorbed by workers comp or insurance.”8 She also stated, “I 
have not had the opportunity to settle any of the medical debts that I have incurred. 
Some were erroneously charged to me when other parties held liability.”9 She did not 
provide corroborating evidence.  
 
Applicant admitted in her answer to the SOR that she owes all the alleged debts 
and was “researching and engaging a debt consolidation company in the interest of 
satisfying”10 each debt. She stated regardless of the outcome of the investigation, she 
will be pursuing the reconciliation of each outstanding debt. Applicant did not provide a 
response to the FORM or supporting documents to show she has taken action to 
resolve any of the SOR debts.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
                                                          
6 Item 2. 
 
7 http://www.webmd.com/vitamins-supplements/ingredientmono-870-alerian.aspxactiveingredientid=870. 
 
8 Item 3.  
 
9 Item 3. 
 
10 Item 2. 
 
11 Items 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts, which began accumulating in 2013. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that she has paid, settled, or resolved any of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. Her financial problems are ongoing, and there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that it is unlikely similar circumstances will recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply.  
 
 Applicant indicated that she believed some medical debts would be addressed 
through workers’ compensation or were erroneously charged to her when third parties 
were responsible. She admitted all of the debts in the SOR and stated that she was 
working on a debt consolidation plan. She did not provide evidence that her financial 
problems were the result of conditions beyond her control. She has been employed 
since 2015. There is insufficient evidence to conclude she has acted responsibly in 
addressing her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. No evidence was provided 
that Applicant participated in financial counseling. There is insufficient evidence she has 
made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve any of the alleged debts or her finances are 
under control. Although she asserted that some debts should have been paid by other 
parties, she did not articulate which debts or any action she may have taken to dispute 
their legitimacy or resolve them. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
  
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for drug involvement and 
substance misuse is set out in AG & 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 25 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any substance misuse. 
  
 
7 
 
 
 From January 2010 to April 2015, Applicant illegally used Valium and Xanax, 
which are controlled substances and require a prescription. In February 2014, she used 
Vicodin, another controlled substance, at least four times, without a prescription. The 
above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 Applicant admitted she was terminated from employment based on violating her 
employer’s drug policy. She denied she used an illegal drug. There is no evidence that 
Applicant used an illegal drug at that time. No disqualifying conditions apply. I find in her 
favor for SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome the problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were being used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant used prescription drugs, not prescribed to her, on various occasions for 
five years. She intimated that her father gave them to her. She was an adult at the time 
she used prescribed controlled substances illegally. There is minimal evidence that she 
acknowledged her substance abuse. Her repeated claim that she now prefers using 
herbs, vitamins and relaxation methods to manage her anxiety does not mitigate a long 
history of substance abuse. The evidence does not establish mitigation under either of 
the above conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 29 years old. For over five years, she used drugs that were not 
prescribed to her to help manage stress, anxiety, and pain. Applicant expressed a 
cavalier attitude toward using medications that were not prescribed to her. That is 
concerning. She is an adult, and if she believes she requires controlled substances to 
manage issues, she is responsible for seeking professional care. Additionally, Applicant 
has numerous delinquent debts and stated she was having them consolidated, but 
provided no evidence that she has done so. Applicant has not demonstrated that she 
understands the seriousness of her conduct or shown a level of maturity to ensure she 
is reliable, trustworthy, and exercises good judgment. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.o:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
