 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-01582 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for several years. He did not submit 
sufficient information to overcome the security concerns engendered by his ongoing 
debts. His request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 17, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
On June 17, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 
At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my 
recommended decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On September 7, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support 
of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on September 13, 2016, and had 30 days 
from the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and 
to submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant did not provide 
any additional information in response to the FORM. I received the case on July 3, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $73,034 for seven 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.g). The $69,856 student loan debt at SOR 
1.a represents about 95 percent of the total debt at issue. The Government also alleged 
that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in March 2012 and was relieved of 
his dischargeable debts in June 2012 (SOR 1.h). Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations, averring that the creditor for his student loan debt is garnishing 15 percent 
of Applicant’s pay, and that he was repaying the SOR 1.f debt. Applicant did not provide 
any documents with his Answer. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom he has 
worked since December 2012. He served in the United States Army between June 1992 
and June 1995. From October 2002 until June 2004, he served in the Army National 
Guard. Applicant returned to the active duty Army in June 2004, but left for medical 
reasons under honorable conditions in September 2009. He receives a monthly $598 
disability benefit from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). Applicant held a security 
clearance while in the military. (FORM, Items 4 and 7) 
 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on nine enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 - 9). 
5 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married since April 2004. They have two 
children, ages 12 and 4. In addition to raising their children, his wife works outside the 
home and earns about $900 monthly. (FORM, Items 4 and 7) 
 
 After Applicant left the Army in 1995, he attended college and received an 
associate’s degree in February 2000. He also took college courses at two different 
schools between October 2009 and October 2011 without earning a degree. Applicant 
incurred the debt at SOR 1.a to finance his education. Applicant contacted the creditor 
for his student loans in April 2016 seeking to establish an affordable repayment plan.  
However, there is no indication that he has been making any payments on that debt. 
Although he claimed his pay has been garnished for this debt, the only paystub in this 
record does not reflect any such deductions. (FORM, Items 4 and 7) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when he had trouble finding work after 
leaving the Army in 1995. He also acknowledged irresponsible use of personal credit. 
During a previous background investigation in 2003, he discussed numerous debts he 
owed at the time. He also claimed he had consolidated several of his debts and was 
paying them as a single payment. Applicant provided a personal financial statement in 
2003 that showed he had $655 remaining each month after expenses, which included 
partial payments on several debts. (FORM, Item 5) 
 
 In 2012, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. He declared $4,550 in 
assets against $86,113 in liabilities. Most of his debt, then as now, consisted of student 
loans, which were not dischargeable. (FORM, Item 6) 
 
 The DOD CAF issued financial interrogatories to Applicant on December 29, 
2015. As presented in the FORM, there were no questions or specific requests for 
information. Applicant’s notarized response6 to whatever questions may have been 
posed in the interrogatories contained numerous documents. An undated PFS shows 
that Applicant has about $26 remaining after monthly expenses. Also presented was an 
account statement showing Applicant pays $93 monthly for five consolidated debts, and 
that he has been paying other debts. Applicant further showed that he has changed 
apartments to reduce expenses, such as high electric bills at his old apartment. 
 
 In his July 2016 response to the SOR, Applicant cited his efforts to cut costs and 
his plans to repay his debts after two car loans are paid off in November 2016. He also 
averred that he is taking other actions to resolve his debts. The deadline for responding 
to the FORM was in October 2016; however, Applicant did not provide any additional 
information or documentation to update whatever efforts he making in this regard. 
                                                 
6 Applicant’s dated his response as “April 4, 2015.” I must assume that this is typographical error, and that 
he responded to the interrogatories in April 2016.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest8 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.9 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.10  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.11 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.12 
                                                 
7 Directive. 6.3. 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
9 Directive, E3.1.14. 
10 Directive, E3.1.15. 
11 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
12 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s debts reasonably raised the 
security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant has been experiencing significant financial problems since the mid-
1990s. Despite being relieved of dischargeable debts in 2012, he has accrued new 
unpaid debts and has still not addressed his student loans apart from writing to the 
lender in 2016. He has not provided information showing that he has reached any 
agreement with his student loans lender aside from his claim the student loan creditor is 
garnishing Applicant’s pay. This information requires application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations).  
 
 I have also considered whether the record supports application of any of the AG 
¶ 20 mitigating conditions. I conclude it does not. Applicant’s debts did not arise from 
circumstances beyond his control, and the record does not inspire confidence that he 
will avoid financial problems in the future. It appears he is making efforts regarding other 
debts, but his current finances are tenuous given his minimal monthly cash flow, and he 
did not sufficiently corroborate his cost reduction efforts. In short, given Applicant’s long 
record of financial problems, it was incumbent on Applicant to provide more and current 
information regarding his finances in order to mitigate the Government’s security 
concerns.  
  
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). I have taken due note of 
Applicant’s honorable military service and his efforts to resolve some of his debts. 
Nonetheless, doubts about his suitability remain because of Applicant’s longstanding 
 
6 
 
financial problems and the fact that he has not corroborated his stated plans to repay 
his debts. Because protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus 
of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of 
access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
