 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00366 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 14, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 30, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On July 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 28, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on February 22, 2017.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
March 8, 2017, scheduling the hearing for May 11, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  The Government offered three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 
1 through 3, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant offered fourteen 
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through N, which were admitted without 
 
2 
 
objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of 
business until May 21, 2017.  Applicant submitted one large Post Hearing Exhibit, 
referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, consisting of multiple pages, including 
six letters of recommendation, relevant Internal Revenue Service and state tax 
documentation concerning 2014 and 2015 tax years, and relevant bank statements.  
Applicant’s Post Hearing Exhibit was admitted without objection.  DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 19, 2017. 
 
 The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He is married with two children. He has a high school 
diploma and two years of college.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a 
Subject Matter Expert for Communications.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance 
in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified the fact that the Applicant failed to file Federal and state income tax for tax 
years 2014 and 2015.  Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  (See 
Answer)  He has been working for his current employer since May 2015.  
 
 Applicant joined the U.S. Marine Corps in 1989.  He served as a combat 
photographer for four years until 1993.  When he left the military, he went to college and 
worked odd jobs until 1999.  From 1999 until 2015, he served on active duty in the U.S. 
Navy as an electronics technician.  In May 2015, he retired with an honorable discharge 
as an E-6.  During his military career, he received a number of awards and 
commendations, including the Navy Achievement Medal, among others.  He also 
underwent a number of deployments including campaigns in support of our most recent 
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Applicant’s spouse is currently on active duty in the U.S. 
Navy on deployment.  (Tr. pp. 21- 24.)   
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2014 
and 2015 as required by law.  He attributes his failure to these returns on the fact that 
he was going through life change getting ready to retire and lost track, and simply 
neglected them.  He always believed that he would be getting a refund anyway and did 
not realize that there could be a problem.  Applicant stated that he usually filed jointly 
with his spouse, but she was deployed this last year and he simply neglected to do it.  
He also explained that in November 2016, he had a motorcycle accident and received a 
severe concussion.  He blacked out and was taken to the hospital for treatment.  
Applicant believes that he is still recovering from the concussion, as he has been  
disoriented and tired at times.  He has not been able to do the math necessary and the 
taxes have been quite a chore.  He has had difficulties doing complex tasks but has 
been increasingly improving.  After tying to prepare his own tax returns without success, 
Applicant hired a professional tax preparer who has assisted him in getting his income 
taxes filed.            
 
 Applicant finally filed both his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2014 and 2015 in December 2016.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)  Regarding his 
2014 taxes, Applicant explained that he received a request for payment from the IRS in 
the amount of $1,491.84 for unpaid taxes for 2014 on April 24, 2017.  On May 8, 2017, 
he paid the debt.  (Tr. p. 31, and Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  Applicant also made a payment 
to the state taxing authorities in the amount of $1,481.84 on April 27, 2017.  Applicant 
mistakenly thought he owed the state this amount when he had actually already paid 
the IRS.  The state kept the payment and plans to apply it to any taxes he may owe.   
 
 Concerning his 2015 taxes, Applicant received a bill from the IRS in the amount 
of $8,197.90, due on May 8, 2017. (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)  With this debt, he set up an 
installment plan arranging to pay a minimum of $500 a month to begin on June 20, 
2017, and continue until the debt is paid off.  (See Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)  
Applicant also received a Final Notice Before Levy from the state regarding his 2015 
taxes with a balance due of $2,041.06.  (Applicant’s Exhibit J.)  Applicant paid the debt 
on April 27, 2017.  (Applicant’s Exhibit K.)             
 
 Applicant also filed his 2016 Federal and state income taxes several days late.  
He was recently notified by the IRS that he owes $8,213 in back taxes for that year.  
Applicant had saved money in his bank account for a down payment on a house, but 
instead he used it to pay the Federal tax debt in full.  Applicant was also notified by the 
state that he owed $1,988 in back taxes for 2016.  Applicant paid the debt in full on May 
10, 2017.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)         
 
 Applicant explained that when he retired, his taxes changed and he and his wife 
were no longer paying enough taxes.  In May 2017, Applicant made adjustments in his 
tax withholdings so that he will not owe taxes at the end of the year, but will be paying 
them throughout the year in his salary.  Applicant also learned when he spoke to the 
IRS agent that there was no record of him filing his income tax returns for 2011.  
Applicant plans to file this return soon.     
 
 
4 
 
 Letters of recommendation from a supervisor, professional associates, coworkers 
and friends indicate that Applicant is a courteous, respectable, trustworthy and honest.  
He is an excellent employee, and is a highly knowledgeable technician.  He works 
independently at remote sites and has never received any negative comments about his 
performance or timeliness.  He is highly recommended for a security clearance.  
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
      
 Applicant is involved in a renaissance jousting play program for children plans to 
start a non-profit organization where he can provide these services.  He provided 
several pictures of his community service program.  (Applicant’s Exhibit N.)   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
5 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
         Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations, and 
 
  (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
  Applicant failed to file his income tax returns for tax years 2014 and 2015 in a 
timely fashion as required by law. He also failed to file his 2016 Federal and state 
income tax returns on time.  Significant tax liability was assessed against him.  The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 (g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
Applicant has filed his 2014, 2015 and 2016 income tax returns and has either 
paid the back taxes owed, or is currently making payments to resolve them.  Admittedly, 
there have been some problems with procrastination, and has not been diligent about 
handling his tax matters until recently.  Even under the assumption that would receive a 
refund, he now understands that he must file his returns on time, or file an extension to 
be able to file them late.  Applicant realizes that he can no longer prepare his own 
returns, but must seek out a professional tax preparer for help.  He has finally adjusted 
his withholdings to prevent these tax problems in the future.  He has addressed his tax 
debt in a reasonable and responsible manner.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant has proudly served our country on 
 
7 
 
active duty in both the Marine Corps and the Navy, in times of war and combat.  In his 
civilian position, he was worked hard to exemplify dedication and commitment to his job 
for the defense department.  He has the trust and respect from his professional 
colleagues, management, coworkers and friends.       
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
