 
 
 
 
1 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 16-01161 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the alcohol and criminal conduct security concerns 
involving four criminal charges related to the consumption of alcohol. He remains on 
probation until March 2019 for the last conviction. National security eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
 
 
 
 
2 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. This decision applies the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) that came into effect on June 8, 2017.1  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on November 29, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On February 15, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On March 9, 2017, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for April 5, 2017. The case proceeded 
as scheduled. Department Counsel offered GE 1 through 6 into evidence. Applicant and 
his wife testified. He offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G into evidence. All exhibits 
were admitted without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 
2017. The record remained open until May 5, 2017, to give Applicant time to submit 
additional information. No other exhibits were provided. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and married to his second wife for seven months. He has 
two children from a first marriage and another child from a former relationship. He earned 
a bachelor’s degree and is working on a master’s degree. He has worked for his current 
employer since May 2010. He received a promotion in 2013 and anticipates another one 
in 2018. Prior to this position, he worked for another defense contractor for two years. (Tr. 
19-23.) His supervisor is aware of this investigation and the underlying security concerns. 
(Tr. 24.)  
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal incidents involving alcohol, including five arrests 
and four convictions. He admitted that from 1995 to 2015, he consumed alcohol, at times 
to the point of excess. (Answer.) 
 
 On November 17, 1995, Applicant was arrested and cited for minor (under 21) in 
possession-purchase/consume/possess liquor. He was 18 years old and had consumed 
alcohol at a party. He was fined and paid $100. (Tr. 27-28; GE 4.)  
 
 In October 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol. His blood alcohol content (BAC) was .19%, which is over twice the 
legal limit. Prior to the arrest, he had been consuming alcohol at a friend’s house and then 
at a club. He was found guilty of driving while impaired (DWI). His driving privileges were 
restricted for 90 days. He subsequently decreased his drinking. (Tr. 29-31.) 
 
 On July 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with operating under the 
influence (OUI) of liquor per se, a misdemeanor. He was driving home from a club when 
he was stopped by the police. He had consumed between four and six beers. His BAC 
was.12%. He was found guilty and fined $890. His driver’s license was revoked for one 
year. He was ordered to attend driver’s intervention and counseling. He was placed on 
supervised probation for two years. He was required to attend alcohol anonymous (AA) 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was decided under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
3 
meetings twice a week and participate in substance abuse therapy while on probation. 
He subsequently met with a counselor for therapy sessions for a period of time. He does 
not recall if he received a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence. Applicant 
abstained from consuming alcohol during the probationary period. Although his counselor 
recommended that he stop drinking, he resumed a few months after he completed 
probation in 2003. (Tr. 32-39, 56; GE 5.) He was 24 years old at the time of the arrest. 
(Tr. 54.) 
 
 On December 5, 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with OWI 3rd offense, 
a felony, and alcohol-open container in vehicle. He had consumed five or six beers and 
a couple drinks over the course of the evening. His BAC was .15%. On March 10, 2016, 
he was found guilty of both counts and was sentenced to 35 days of jail. After completing 
the jail sentence on April 12, 2016, he began serving three years of supervised probation, 
which continues to March 2019. He was also required to serve 60 days or complete 360 
hours of community service, in lieu of paying fines and costs. He was ordered to 
participate in counseling. (Tr. 40-41.) His driver’s license was revoked until August 2016, 
when it was reinstated. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant has served 39 hours of community service to date. He meets with his 
probationary officer once a month. He is required to abstain from alcohol and subject to 
random urine screenings and he calls an office every morning to learn if he is required to 
test that day. He submits samples once a week. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant started attending AA in January 2016 before his conviction. He attends 
AA once a week. He attended AA the day before this hearing. He does not have an AA 
sponsor. (Tr.47) He has participated in counseling with a psychologist, who has a 
specialty in addictions, for over a year. The psychologist reported that Applicant takes his 
drinking problems seriously and gives him an excellent prognosis. He did not provide a 
diagnosis. (AE E.)  
 
 The last time Applicant was intoxicated from consuming alcohol was December 5, 
2015. The last time he consumed alcohol was on December 24, 2015, when he made a 
conscious decision to stop drinking that day. (Tr. 24-26.) He admitted that he has an 
alcohol problem and “hit rock bottom as I started going back through AA.” (Tr. 50, 52.) He 
has learned to live a better managed life. (Tr. 52.) In a letter, Applicant humbly and 
candidly stated that he takes full responsibility for his actions and poor decisions to 
consume alcohol and drive. (AE A.) 
  
 Applicant submitted character references. His direct supervisor wrote that 
Applicant is trustworthy and exhibits “the utmost integrity.” (AE B.) A co-worker has 
complete confidence in Applicant. He said Applicant is “highly respected by his colleagues 
and our customers.” (AE C.) Applicant’s employer is aware of his alcohol-related arrests.  
He has known Applicant since hiring him in 2009. He has never observed Applicant 
engaging in alcohol-related behaviors. He does not believe Applicant is a security risk. 
(AE D.) Applicant’s father wrote a strong letter in support of his son. (AE F.) His wife has 
known him for three years, including as a co-worker. She said he has abstained from 
 
 
 
 
4 
alcohol since December 2015 and takes his commitment to sobriety seriously. She does 
not think he is a security risk. (AE G.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Finally, 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 sets out the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. 
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with alcohol-related driving offenses three 
times: in October 1999; in June 2001; and in December 2015. He was convicted of all 
charges, the last one being a felony. His BAC was over the legal limit each time he was 
arrested, documenting impaired judgment. The evidence established both disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 23 describes three conditions that could mitigate these security concerns 
raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 23(a). Given his previous 
three alcohol-related convictions and treatment subsequent to the 2001 conviction, 
insufficient time has passed since the last incident in December 2015. The evidence 
establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 23(b).  Applicant admits that he has an alcohol 
problem and has demonstrated a pattern of abstinence since December 2015. AG ¶ 23(d) 
partially applies. Applicant has not participated in a formal alcohol treatment program, but 
has been in therapy with a psychologist, who has a specialty in addictions, since January 
2016. The psychologist did not report a diagnosis for Applicant, but stated he has an 
excellent prognosis based on his participation in counseling. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
Applicant was convicted of three alcohol-related driving offenses. He was on 
probation for two years after the second conviction for a July 2001 arrest. After being 
convicted in March 2016 for his third offense, a felony, he served 34 days in jail and was 
then placed on three years of supervised probation that will continue until March 2019. 
His driver’s license was restricted for 90 days after his first conviction in 1995; it was 
revoked for one year after the second conviction; and it was revoked again for about six 
months after the third conviction. The evidence establishes the above three disqualifying 
conditions. 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns 
raised in this case: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
 
 
 
 
7 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
Given the fact that he was previously convicted of two alcohol-related offences, 
sufficient time has not passed since Applicant’s last alcohol-related driving offense, which 
occurred about a year and a half ago. Although he provided documentation of his 
successful work performance, that evidence does not outweigh the fact that he is on 
supervised probation until March 2019 for a felony conviction. He remains subject to 
random alcohol screenings. There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under 
either of the above conditions.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances, commonly referred to as the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should also consider the following nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) 
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c) the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible, intelligent, and 
educated 38-year-old man. He has successfully worked for defense contractors, as 
documented by recent letters of recommendation. He is dedicated to his current job. He 
testified candidly and humbly. He admitted his mistakes and takes responsibility for them. 
These are persuasive factors in the analysis of the whole person. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
However, Applicant has a history of alcohol-related driving offenses, the most 
recent having occurred in December 2015, and having been resulted in a felony 
conviction in March 2016. At this time, he has not established a sufficient history of 
complying with the law and avoiding alcohol-related incidents. He served 35 days in jail 
and is on criminal probation until March 2019, which includes reporting to a probation 
officer and mandatory random alcohol urine screenings. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance at this time. He did not met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guidelines for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:        Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Against Applicant       
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                             
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
