 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     ----------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-01244 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel, and  
Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for 
access to classified information. He adequately explained the circumstances and 
resolved any security concern stemming from his past financial history. He did not falsify 
his security clearance application when he failed to disclose delinquent financial 
accounts of which he was then unaware. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on March 28, 2015. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on July 26, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the U.S. 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort George G. Meade, 
Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find 
that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access 
to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual 
 
2 
 
reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial 
considerations and Guideline E for personal conduct (falsification).   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 12, 2016. He denied five of the six 
delinquent financial accounts alleged under Guideline F, and he denied the falsification 
allegation under Guideline E. He also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The hearing did not proceed as scheduled on February 3, 2017, due to inclement 
winter weather at Applicant’s place of residence. The hearing took place as rescheduled 
on March 3, 2017. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received March 9, 2017.     
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 77-year-old employee who is seeking a security clearance for his 
job as an information technology (IT) specialist with a company doing business in the 
defense industry. He has been employed by this company since January 2015. He has 
been on leave without pay since about August 2016, when an interim security clearance 
was withdrawn. Since then, he and his wife have relied on Social Security benefits for 
their income.  
 
Applicant has worked in the IT industry since 1965, and his employment history 
includes working for various entities of the federal government as a contractor.1 His 
employment history also includes active duty military service in the U.S. Air Force 
during 1958-1964. His first marriage ended in divorce. He married for the second time in 
1981. His spouse is 63 years old, and she is not employed outside the home. They live 
on a 157-acre farm, which contains about 90 open acres suitable for grazing livestock. 
They no longer raise cattle, and the farm has not been an income-producing asset since 
about 2004.2 
 
In his March 2015 security clearance application, Applicant, in response to 
Question 26 concerning financial matters, answered all questions in the negative, 
thereby denying any delinquent, collection, or past-due accounts as well as other 
financial problems.3 The background investigation reported otherwise.4 In his answer to 
the SOR as well as during the hearing, Applicant explained that he was unaware of any 
derogatory financial accounts that should have been disclosed in response to Question 
26.5 
 
In addition to the falsification allegation, the SOR alleged a history of financial 
problems consisting of six collection or charged-off accounts for a total of about 
                                                          
1 Tr. 52-55.  
 
2 Tr. 48.  
 
3 Exhibit 1.  
 
4 Exhibits 2, 3, and 4.  
 
5 Tr. 48.  
 
 
3 
 
$23,749. Upon further review, the charged-off account (without an amount) in SOR ¶ 
1.b is the original account of the $2,012 collection account in SOR ¶ 1.e. The April 2015 
credit report shows the original account had a balance of $2,102 when it was charged 
off and sold to another lender for collection.6 Because of this duplication, the allegation 
in SOR ¶ 1.b is decided for Applicant.   
 
In his answer to the SOR as well as during the hearing, Applicant stated he was 
familiar with two of the delinquent accounts in the SOR; he disputed the charged-off 
account on the basis that someone else charged to his account; and he explained that 
the $289 collection account should have been paid by an insurance claim. He further 
explained that the other four accounts were unknown debts, and he has tried 
unsuccessfully to have them removed from his credit report.  
 
  The Government presented three credit reports from September 2012, April 
2015, and June 2016 in support of its case.7 The September 2012 credit report has 
three collection accounts for a total of about $17,160. Those three collection accounts 
also appear in the April 2015 credit report. And the six delinquent accounts in the SOR 
appear in the April 2015 credit report.  
 
The June 2016 credit report, which was obtained about a month before the SOR 
was issued in July 2016, is nearly perfect. The report has an account for an installment 
auto loan that was 30 days past due on one occasion. Otherwise, the report reflects no 
public records, repossessions, past-due accounts, charged-off accounts, foreclosure 
accounts, collection accounts, or other negative accounts. None of the six delinquent 
accounts in the SOR appear in the June 2016 credit report. The 2016 credit report 
shows Applicant’s overall financial situation is stable and under control.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.8 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.9 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 3.  
 
7 Exhibits 2, 3, and 4.  
 
8 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
 
4 
 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”10 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.11 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.12 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.13 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.14 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.15 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.16 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.17 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.18 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
10 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .19 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions taken to resolve the issue.    
 
 This case is a bit unusual, because the Government’s documentary evidence is 
in conflict. The 2012 and 2015 credit reports are sufficient to establish the delinquent 
accounts in the SOR. But the 2016 credit report is nearly perfect. And the report has 
none of the delinquent accounts in the SOR. Although Applicant did not present 
documentation, he may rely on the Government’s evidence if it supports his case, which 
the 2016 credit report does. To his credit, Department Counsel acknowledged during 
closing argument that it was “fair” to Applicant to offer the 2016 credit report as an 
exhibit.20 As noted in the findings of fact, the 2016 credit report shows Applicant’s 
overall financial situation is stable and under control.  
 
 Based on the 2016 credit report, it would be unreasonable to require Applicant to 
further dispute the delinquent accounts in the SOR, because there is nothing more to 
dispute. To impose such a requirement would force Applicant to essentially prove a 
negative. Accordingly, based on the totality of facts and circumstances, I am persuaded 
that Applicant’s past financial history, as reflected in the three credit reports and as 
explained by Applicant during the hearing, does not rise to the level sufficient to justify 
an unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F. 
  
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
                                                          
19 AG ¶ 18. 
 
20 Tr. 58.  
 
 
6 
 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special concern is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.”21 A statement is false when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not 
deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be 
reported.  
 
 Concerning the falsification allegation, I am not persuaded that Applicant’s failure 
to disclose the delinquent accounts was deliberate. Applicant explained that he was 
unaware of any derogatory accounts when he completed the 2015 security clearance 
application. His explanation was credible and worthy of belief.    
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a 
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or 
vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he 
met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
21 AG ¶ 15.  
 
