 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03485 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 14, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D, Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On December 10, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On January 6, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F, Financial Considerations.  (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 22, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on March 30, 2017.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing that same 
day, scheduling the hearing for April 14, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  The Government offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 
 
2 
 
through 4, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant presented nine exhibits, 
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A thorough I, which were admitted without objection.  
He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business 
on May 14, 2017, to allow the Applicant to submit additional supporting documentation.  
Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, marked as A, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 1, 2017. 
  
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He is unmarried with a young son.  He has a high 
school diploma and one semester of college.  He is employed with a defense contractor 
as a Facilities Maintenance Technician.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified the fact that Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for 
tax years 2006 through 2012, and there are four Federal tax liens entered against him 
totaling approximately $59,000.  Applicant admits each of the allegations in the SOR.  
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)     
 
 Prior to becoming a professional surfer, Applicant worked a regular job and paid 
taxes and filed his income tax returns.  (Tr. p. 46.)  In 2006, Applicant was sponsored by 
surfing companies to become a professional surfer, surfing for a team, and competing in 
Pro Am surfing tournaments.  He was told that he would receive a travel fund to pay his 
expenses.  (Tr. p. 43.)  He did not understand that his travel fund was income for tax 
purposes.  He did not understand what his tax responsibilities were as it related to his 
independent contractor status.  He contends that he did not receive the proper 
instruction nor did he have the understanding or knowledge required on how to report 
his income or expense or how to pay self-employment taxes.  Furthermore, he claims 
 
3 
 
that he never received a W-2 and so he was not aware that he owed anything.  
Applicant continued working full time as a sponsored surfer until 2012. 
 
 As a result, Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax 
year 2006 through 2012 as required by law.  Applicant contends that he did not realize 
that he was required to pay taxes on the money he received, as he thought it was a 
travel fund.  He states that he averaged about $30,000 a year.  (Tr. p. 42.)   
 
 Applicant also became indebted to the Federal Government for a tax lien entered 
against him in the approximate amount of $16,255.70 for back taxes owed for 2006; a 
tax lien entered against him in the approximate amount of $13,409.31 for tax year 2008; 
and a tax lien entered against him in the approximate amount of $13,036.34 for tax year 
2009.  All of this debt remains owing.  (Tr. pp. 54-65.)      
 
 In 2015, Applicant learned from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that the 
travel fund he had been receiving all along as a professional surfer was in fact his salary 
that he was required to pay taxes on.  Applicant had initially tried to prepare his returns 
himself but upon the advice of the IRS was told that he needed to hire a tax professional 
to help him. Since November 2016, Applicant has been working closely with a specific 
IRS agent to resolve his tax problems.  A letter from the IRS agent dated April 13, 2017 
indicates that he anticipates Applicant’s case to be resolved quickly once the returns are 
received.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)  He is filing his tax returns, going back and refiling 
others, to include the proper deductions such as monies spent on expenses, including 
food, travel, surfboards, etc. 
 
 Even before receiving the SOR, Applicant had been working with the IRS to clear 
up his tax issues since he found out about the problem in 2015.  Applicant has been 
working with his tax preparer on filing 2010, 2011 and 2012 income tax returns.  He 
recently filed his 2016 income tax return.  He understands from the IRS agent that any 
refund he gets will be automatically applied to his back tax liability, or credited toward 
his tax liens.  (Tr. p. 51.)  Applicant states that he was also told by the IRS agent he is 
working with that before the tax liens can be addressed, he must file his income tax 
returns for 2010, 2011, and 2012, and that the totals for the Federal taxes on those 
returns must be amended.  (Tr. p. 55.)  Applicant then plans to start an installment plan 
to resolve the remaining taxes owed.  He continues to work toward resolving his tax 
issues.  A letter from the Applicant submitted after the hearing indicates that he has 
finalized his tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013 and has faxed them to 
his IRS agent.  Applicant now working on his tax returns for tax years 2006, 2007, 2008 
and 2009 so he can amend what was owed.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  From 2014 to 
2015, Applicant worked as a surf instructor.  During that time he was paying taxes on 
his income and filing taxes.        
            
 A letter from Applicant’s employer indicates that he is performing his duties in a 
very satisfactory manner.  He has demonstrated good initiative for learning all aspects 
of the job and gets along well with fellow employees.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant enjoys his current job.  (Tr. p. 53.)  He is well respected in the 
community and is involved in charity and volunteer work.  He is a new father of a son 
and understands that he must always be responsible going forward. 
 
 Letters from close friends, known as family, who have known the Applicant since 
he was young attest to his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.  Applicant is 
described as very polite, soft-spoken, helpful and humble.  He is said to be a great role 
model for the younger children and is an asset to the community.  (Applicant’s Exhibits 
D and E.)     
 
 A letter of recommendation submitted on Applicant’s behalf from a past co-
worker who has known him for over ten years, shows her great respect and admiration 
for the Applicant.  He is considered to be a remarkable person, first to volunteer and 
always dependable and willing to do more than expected.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)       
 
 Applicant has been actively involved in his community providing volunteer 
services for the Women and Children’s Medical Center, the Make a Wish Foundation, 
the Wounded Warriors and the local schools.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the 
national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that 
are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
 
5 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
  
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
  
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same.         
   
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2006 
through 2012.  There are four Federal tax liens entered against the Applicant for tax 
years 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009, totaling approximately $59,000 that remain 
outstanding.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three are potentially 
applicable here.  
  
  20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;    
 
  20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
          20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Although these mitigating conditions partially apply, they do not fully mitigate the 
fact that Applicant not as of yet filed any of the tax returns at issue, nor has he begun to 
resolve the debt owed on the four Federal tax liens.  Accordingly, this guideline must be 
found against him. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
7 
 
Applicant must continue to work with the IRS to resolve his back tax issues and  
pay the taxes that he owes.  Assuming he does this, he may very well be eligible for a 
security clearance in the future, but not at this time.  I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all relevant facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Consideration security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:             Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
