1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No. 16-01779 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
August 22, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant is indebted to 13 creditors in the approximate amount of $17,046. He 
failed to produce documentation to show he resolved any of his delinquencies to the 
satisfaction of his creditors. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of Case 
On April 14, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Item 3.) On June 2, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 17, 2016. (Item 2.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On August 31, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on September 1, 2016, and received by him on September 8, 
2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the 30 days allotted, which ended 
October 8, 2016. DOHA assigned the case to me on August 2, 2017. Items 1 through 6 
are admitted into evidence.1  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All security clearance decisions issued on or after 
June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married to his third wife since August 20, 2012. He 
was married to his first wife from 1998 to 2010. He was married to his second wife from 
May 2011 to August 5, 2012. He has worked for his current employer, a government 
contractor, since December 2014. He served on active duty in the Army from 2000 to 
2014, and was honorably discharged. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to 13 creditors in the approximate amount 
of $17,046. Applicant admitted to all of the debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.m. 
Applicant’s debts appear in the credit reports dated May 7, 2015; and May 26, 2016. 
(Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $9,534, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. This debt is identified on Applicant’s credit report as an 
“individual” account that was reported as 180-days delinquent in May 2015. Applicant 
                                                 
1 Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM or affirmatively waive any objection to Item 4, I will 
consider only those facts in Item 4 that are not adverse to Applicant unless they are also contained in 
other evidence or included in the admissions in his answer to the SOR. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
claimed that this debt was accrued by his first wife while he was deployed. He indicated 
he was “in the process of going to court over this matter,” but produced no 
documentation to substantiate his claim.2 It remains unresolved. (Item 2 at 4; Item 5 at 
14; Item 6 at 5.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $2,662, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. This debt is identified on Applicant’s credit report as an 
“individual” account that was reported as 150-days delinquent in April 2015. Applicant 
claimed that this debt was accrued by his first wife while he was deployed. He indicated 
he was “in the process of going to court over this matter,” but produced no 
documentation to substantiate his claim. It remains unresolved. (Item 2 at 4; Item 5 at 
14; Item 6 at 6.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $1,227, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt is identified on Applicant’s credit report as 
“department/mail order” account that was reported as 150-days delinquent in April 2015. 
Applicant claimed that this debt was accrued by his first wife while he was deployed. He 
indicated he was “in the process of going to court over this matter,” but produced no 
documentation to substantiate his claim. It remains unresolved. (Item 2 at 4; Item 5 at 
12; Item 6 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $1,106, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt is owed to the Federal Government as a result of an 
overpayment. It became delinquent in March 2015, and remains unresolved. (Item 2; 
Item 6 at 3.)  
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $430, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. It was for a rental or leasing agreement. This debt became delinquent in 
December 2014. It is listed on Applicant’s 2016 credit report as “unpaid.” Applicant 
indicated he disputed this debt because the creditor “just recently added this charge” 
despite returning his security deposit. However, he produced no documentation to 
support his dispute. This debt is not resolved. (Item 2; Item 6 at 1.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $418, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt is identified on Applicant’s credit report as a credit-card 
account that was reported as 150-days delinquent in May 2015. In his Answer, 
Applicant claimed that his second wife accrued this debt while he was deployed, using 
an expired power of attorney. He presented nothing further in this regard. It remains 
unresolved. (Item 2; Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 4.)  
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $299, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt first became delinquent in July 2012. It is listed on Applicant’s 
2016 credit report as “unpaid.” In his Answer, Applicant indicated he was “working 
                                                 
2 Further, this debt and the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c became delinquent after Applicant had been 
discharged and was married to his third wife. His explanation is not credible. 
 
 
4 
 
 
towards getting [this debt] resolved.” He presented nothing further in this regard. This 
deb is not resolved. (Item 2; Item 6 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $255, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. This debt is identified on Applicant’s credit reports as a 
“department/mail order” account that was reported as charged-off in 2013. In his 
Answer, Applicant claimed that his second wife accrued this debt while he was 
deployed, using an expired power of attorney. He presented nothing further in this 
regard. It remains unresolved. (Item 5 at 6; Item 6 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $214, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt first became delinquent in January 2012. It is listed on 
Applicant’s 2016 credit report as “unpaid.” In his Answer, Applicant claimed that his 
second wife accrued this debt while he was deployed, using an expired power of 
attorney. He presented nothing further in this regard. It remains unresolved. (Item 6 at 
2.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $220, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. This debt is identified on Applicant’s credit report as a utility 
account that was reported as charged-off in 2012. In his Answer, Applicant indicated he 
was “working towards getting [this debt] resolved.” He presented nothing further in this 
regard. It remains unresolved. (Item 2; Item 5 at 13; Item 6 at 8.)  
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $107, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.k. This debt was placed for collections in March 2015. In his Answer, 
Applicant claimed that his second wife accrued this debt while he was deployed, using 
an expired power of attorney. He presented nothing further in this regard. It remains 
unresolved. (Item 5 at 5.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $50, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.l. This debt is identified on Applicant’s credit report as a collection account 
for a debt owed to a city, which was delinquent since May 2015. In his Answer, 
Applicant claimed that his second wife accrued this debt while he was deployed, using 
an expired power of attorney. He presented nothing further in this regard. It remains 
unresolved. (Item 5 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $524, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.m. This debt was charged off by the creditor in April 2015. In his Answer, 
Applicant claimed that his second wife accrued this debt while he was deployed, using 
an expired power of attorney. He presented nothing further in this regard. It remains 
unresolved. (Item 5 at 13.) 
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
 
 
5 
 
 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15, states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
 
 
6 
 
 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant is indebted to 13 creditors in the approximate amount of $17,046. He 
has documented no action to resolve these delinquencies. The facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
 
7 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s SOR-
alleged financial problems have been ongoing since 2012, are unresolved, and continue 
to date. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant asserts 
that some of his debts were incurred by his ex-wives while he was deployed. First, the 
dates of those delinquencies do not necessarily correspond with his military service or 
past marriages. Second, he did not provide evidence that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances with respect to his debts, which is necessary for full mitigation under 
this condition. He married his present wife in 2012 and left the Army in 2014. He has 
been fully employed as a civilian since December 2014. Yet many of his debts, 
including those alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, 1.k, and 1.m, were placed for 
collections or were charged off in 2015. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully 
applicable. 
 
Applicant has not established a history of responsible action with respect to his 
delinquent debts. There is no discernable evidence of a good-faith effort to repay those 
debts in the record, or of any financial counseling. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
 Applicant claimed he contested the delinquency in SOR ¶ 1.e because the debt 
was charged after his security deposit had been returned. However, Applicant failed to 
document his dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(e) has not been established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his financial 
difficulties. He failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or 
permanent behavioral change, concerning his continuing pattern of financial 
irresponsibility. His ongoing delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, 
coercion, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that he did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
