 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00303 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 3, 
2016. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 8. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. The Government’s 
evidence is admitted. The case was assigned to me on July 12, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e, with 
explanations. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He served in the military from 1972 to 1995 and was 
honorably discharged. He married in 1982 and divorced in 2011. He has two grown 
children. He has worked for his present employer since 2003.2 
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts and a judgment. The debts and the 
judgment are corroborated by credit reports from April 2015, December 2015, and 
September 2016.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the charged-off delinquent debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($18,297), but disputed the balance owed and indicated that he was making 
payments of $111 twice a month on the debt.3 He disclosed in his March 2015 security 
clearance application (SCA) that he “made commitment to pay $447.33 a month until 
the entire balance is repaid.”4 The December 2015 credit report reflected there had 
been no activity on the account since July 2014.5 The September 2016 credit report 
shows a reduced balance and payment in August 2016, but no other evidence was 
provided to show Applicant is making consistent payments or its current status.6  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, referring to SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant stated 
“arrangement[s] have been made to clear this account.”7 With regard to the debt in SOR 
                                                          
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
6 Item 7. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
¶ 1.c, he admitted owing the debt, and he stated it was paid.8 He did not provide 
supporting documents for either debt. For SOR ¶ 1.e, he stated “as of this date payment 
is being made to clear this matter up.”9 No supporting documents were provided.  
 
 Applicant denied the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.d. Apparently the debt is for a lease. 
He stated: “The person who did had my name on the bill which she was contacted and 
clear[ed] the bill of my name.”10 The judgment is listed on his most recent credit bureau 
report from September 2016. It is not resolved.  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in September 2015. He 
was confronted with the debts that were later alleged in the SOR. Applicant attributed 
his financial difficulties to his employer changing how he was paid. He told the 
investigator that his employer transferred $1,000 a month from a health and welfare 
account and deposited it into a 401k pension plan. He told the investigator that in 
September 2015 he obtained a credit report and some of his son’s accounts were listed 
in his credit report. His son has the same name. Applicant did not state that the 
accounts in the SOR belonged to his son.11 Applicant did not provide any documents to 
show he has been paying or paid his delinquent debts or the judgment. He did not 
provide information about his current financial status.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
8 Item 2. 
 
9 Item 2. 
 
10 Item 2. 
 
11 Item 8. 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts and a judgment that he is unable or 
unwilling to pay. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant asserted in his SOR answer that he had paid, was paying, or intended 
to resolve the alleged debts and judgment. The FORM repeatedly stated that he failed 
to provide corroborating evidence to document his actions. There is no evidence to 
substantiate his assertions. Applicant’s history of being unable or unwilling to resolve his 
debts is ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
 The only information provided by Applicant regarding the cause of his financial 
problems was that his employer changed his payment plan in 2012. Without additional 
amplifying information, I am unable to find that his inability to pay his delinquent debts 
was beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Although, Applicant may be making 
payments toward his largest delinquent debt, and he may have resolved others, he 
failed to provide documented evidence to verify that conclusion. He did not provide 
proof of payments or that the judgment was removed from his credit report. There is no 
information about his current finances. I cannot find that under the circumstances he 
has acted responsibly. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence confirming that Applicant received financial counseling. In 
his SOR answer, Applicant stated he was paying his largest delinquent debt and had 
resolved or intended to resolve other debts. There is no supporting documentation, so I 
am unable to find that there are clear indications his financial problems are being 
resolved or under control, or that he made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.d. He claimed it was not his debt. 
For the application of AG ¶ 20(e), he must provide documented proof to substantiate his 
dispute and evidence of his actions to resolve the issue. Applicant did not provide this 
information. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 60 years old. He served honorably in the military. He has been 
employed by his present employer since 2003. He has a judgment and other unresolved 
delinquent debts. He did not provide sufficient evidence in mitigation. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
