KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline G; Guideline E
DIGEST: We will consider new evidence insofar as it bears upon threshold issues such as due
process. Applicant has not shown that he actually submitted documents to the Judge that were
not received and considered.  We find no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied the due
process afforded by the Directive. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-01129.a1
DATE: 08/07/2017
DATE: August 7, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-01129
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
19, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline G
(Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 26, 2017,
after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Franciso
Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s
favorable findings under Guidelines G and E are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant left active duty with the U.S. military in 2008, after which he experienced
unemployment.  Shortly before and after his discharge, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts
totaling about $40,000.  These debts were for such things as cell phone services, student loans, etc. 
In his clearance interview, Applicant promised to resolve his debts.  However, he did nothing and
testified that he had no good reason for his inaction.  He has moved in with his girlfriend, and they
are splitting expenses.  Applicant states that his net monthly income is $2,000.  He claimed to have
resolved two SOR debts, but he did not provide corroborating evidence.
Applicant has denied some of the SOR debts, contending that they were actually his father’s,
who has a similar name.  Applicant hired a credit repair firm and provided post-hearing documents
showing that some debts no longer appear on his credit reports.  However, there is no evidence to
show whether they were removed because they had been resolved or whether they simply dropped
off the reports due to age.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that Applicant had admitted all of the delinquent debts in the SOR and that
he had been aware of most of them for years.  The Judge stated that Applicant had repeatedly
promised to resolve his financial problems but waited until shortly before the hearing to start taking
action.  He concluded that Applicant had failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the
concerns in the SOR.  The Judge noted Applicant’s military service, which included a lengthy
deployment to Iraq, and that he has held a clearance for many years without incident or concern. 
However, he cited to Applicant’s procrastination in even beginning to address his financial
problems, despite having been aware of them for some time.
Discussion
Applicant has raised an issue of due process.  In doing so, he refers to matters from outside
the record, which we generally cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  However, we will consider
new evidence insofar as it bears upon threshold issues such as due process.    See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 15-4003 at 2 (App. Bd. May 25, 2017).  
The Judge held the record open after the hearing for Applicant to submit additional evidence. 
Tr. at 50.  Applicant emailed additional documents to the Judge, which were included in the record
as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D.  AE A is a cover memo that describes the significance of
the other submitted documents.  
Applicant has attached to his brief documents that he contends he sent to the Judge but were
not included in the record.1  These are single-page reports from credit reporting agencies.  There is
nothing in the record to suggest that Applicant actually sent these reports to the Judge.  For one
thing, they are not mentioned in the cover memorandum admitted as AE A. In addition, one of them
was generated on a date after the close of the record and, indeed, after the Judge issued the Decision. 
Applicant has not shown that he actually submitted documents to the Judge that were not received
and considered.  We find no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied the due process afforded
by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-04472 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2017).2  Beyond this,
Applicant cites to his military career and to his efforts to address his debts.  These arguments are not
enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.    See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08842 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department 
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved
in favor of the national security.”
1The attachments to Applicant’s brief also include the documents admitted as AE A through D.  These
documents pertained to the Guidelines G and E allegations that the Judge resolved in Applicant’s favor, along with
his military discharge certificate.  
2Furthermore, given the limited nature of the evidence and the timing of any disposition of indebtedness it
is unlikely the evidence would have altered the Judge’s conclusions. 
 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
