 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 16-02162 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the alleged financial and personal conduct security 
concerns. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.1  
 
                                                 
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
Although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG, my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On November 11, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On February 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On May 2, 2017, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing, scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2017. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through O. All exhibits were admitted.2 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 24, 2017. The record remained open until June 16, 2017, 
to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. He timely submitted 
documents, which I marked as AE P through AE T, and admitted into evidence without 
an objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old and married for the second time since 2007. He has four 
children with his first wife to whom he was married from 2001 to 2009. He has custody of 
his children, ages 15, 14, 11, and 9. He does not receive child support, although his former 
wife is legally required to pay it. Applicant recently started attending college. (Tr. 28-29.) 
He started working for his current employer, a defense contractor, in February 2014. (GE 
1.) He has been steadily employed for the past 10 years. (Tr. 31.)   
 
 Applicant attributed his inability to pay delinquent debts to his medical condition 
and his wife’s unemployment from January to October 2016. He has a medical condition, 
which causes him to frequently go to the emergency room. Many of the alleged debts are 
bills from those visits during three years when he did not have medical insurance. Some 
of the bills are family members’ medical bills. (Tr. 33-35.)  (Tr. 44.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from December 2016 and February 2016, 
the SOR alleged 49 debts, of which 41 are unpaid medical bills. The debts became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2016, and total about $32,000. (GE 2, GE 3.)  
 
 In May 2017, Applicant paid the state tax liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($216) and 
1.b ($158). (AE B, AE C.) In June 2017, he paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.vv ($55.).(AE 
R.) He has not paid or resolved any of the other 46 debts. (Tr. 43-45.) He had not taken 
steps to resolve the delinquent debts prior to the hearing. He said it was difficult to pay 
the debts and ongoing expenses because his wife had been unemployed. (Tr. 57.) He 
filed his 2014 and 2016 federal and state income tax returns, but not his 2015.3 He intends 
to file them when he receives tax documents from his previous employer. (Tr. 42.) 
                                                 
2 Applicant made some minor corrections to his personal interview. (GE 2.) Those changes are referenced 
in the transcript and on the exhibit. (Tr. 12 through 19.) 
 
3 The SOR did not allege Applicant’s failure to file 2015 income tax returns or failure to disclose that 
information in his January 2016 SCA. Hence, those facts will not be considered in the analysis of 
disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in the analyses of mitigating conditions and whole-person 
concept, and in evaluating Applicant’s credibility. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Post-hearing, Applicant enrolled in a debt consolidation program. He included ten 
of the SOR alleged debts into that program. They total $20,620. He agreed to make 
monthly payments of $330 until the debts are paid. (AE Q, AE T.) He intends to begin 
paying other alleged debts as money becomes available. He also started a medical flex 
spending plan that will help decrease out-of-pocket medical bills. (AE Q.) 
  
 Applicant earns about $70,500 annually. His wife earns about $500 a week. He 
submitted a budget that he and his wife drafted a couple weeks prior to the hearing. After 
paying expenses, including rent and the $330 debt reduction payment, he has about 
$2,000 remaining at the end of the month. (Tr. 40, 60; AE S.) He has not participated in 
credit or budget counseling until recently, when he enrolled in the debt program in June 
2017. (Tr. 39.) 
 
 Applicant did not disclose any delinquent debts in the security clearance 
application (SCA) that he submitted in January 2016. (GE 1.) He said he knew he had 
them at the time, and thought he had disclosed some. He was in a hurry to complete the 
SCA and became frustrated with the software program. He found it difficult to correct 
answers. He was not embarrassed to disclose them. (Tr. 61-66.) He did not disclose his 
unfiled 2015 income tax returns. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant submitted his 2016 performance evaluation. He received a composite 
score of 3.2 out of 5.0. His supervisor stated that Applicant “takes his responsibilities 
seriously and has demonstrated full accountability for his choices.” (AE N.) His son wrote 
a loving and complimentary letter about his father. (AE M.) He received an Outstanding 
Employee award for the second quarter of 2015. (AE O.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865 provides: “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Beginning in 2011, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he has been 
unable or unwilling to resolve. The evidence raises the above security concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Forty-six of the alleged delinquent debts are ongoing, unresolved, and continue to 
cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. Applicant attributed his 
numerous unpaid medical bills to the lack of medical insurance for several years, and his 
wife’s unemployment for most of 2016. Those circumstances were beyond Applicant’s 
control. However, there is insufficient evidence to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 
 
 
6 
 
 
20(b) because Applicant did not document actions he took to responsibly manage his 
obligations while they were accumulating.  
 
 A month after the hearing, Applicant entered into a debt consolidation program that 
includes some credit or financial counseling. However, there are no clear indications that 
his SOR-alleged debts are under control. The evidence does not establish full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant paid three debts, which showed some good-faith effort to 
resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.vv. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. 
Applicant recently entered into a payment plan for 10 debts, but has not yet established 
a record of making payments on that plan. The majority of the debts are unresolved. 
Applicant did not provide evidence to substantiate a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant knew he had delinquent debts when he completed his SCA, but failed to 
disclose them because he had difficulty working with the software program. Given the 
large number of debts that were delinquent at the time he submitted the SCA, his 
explanation for not disclosing even one debt is not credible. I find he deliberately omitted 
disclosing delinquent debts from his SCA. The evidence establishes the above 
disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
7 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under the above condition. 
The failure to disclose requested information is not a minor offense and casts doubt on 
Applicants’ reliability and judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 40-year-old 
married man, who has successfully worked for his employer since February 2014. He is 
a good father and has custody of his four children from a prior marriage. Since 2011, he 
has accumulated a large amount of delinquent debts, primarily unpaid medical bills for 
his care. One month after his hearing, he contacted a debt consolidation company to 
begin resolving ten debts through monthly payments. There is no evidence that he made 
his first payment into the plan. He said he would begin resolving the other debts as 
finances became available. He started a medical flex spending account to help decrease 
his medical bills and recently drafted a budget. While those recent actions demonstrate 
some willingness to resolve financial obligations, to-date, he has not established a record 
of addressing them or managing his finances. In addition to having delinquent debts, he 
acknowledged he has not filed federal or state tax returns for 2015. 
 
 When Applicant completed a SCA in January 2016, he did not disclose any of the 
49 alleged delinquent debts or his unfiled 2015 taxes. His explanation that he had difficulty 
with the software program and was unable to make corrections in the SCA is not credible.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns raised under the guidelines for financial considerations 
and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:               AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph: 1.a:    Against Applicant 
                    
                      Subparagraphs 1.b and 1c:     For Applicant 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.uu    Against Applicant  
 
              Subparagraph 1.vv:       For Applicant 
 
     Subparagraph 1.ww:        Against Applicant 
 
                   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraph 2.a:         Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly not 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
                                                  
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
