 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 16-02686 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges eight delinquent debts totaling 
$28,439. He paid three debts totaling about $1,000, and his five student loan debts 
totaling $27,479 debts are in a payment plan. He has established his financial 
responsibility. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. He credibly 
stated that he thought his student loans were deferred, and he forgot to include his 
delinquent SOR debts on his June 18, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Personal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 18, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his SCA. (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On January 3, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
                                         
 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines. (HE 2) 
 
On January 26, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. (HE 3) On March 31, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On May 
5, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On May 31, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for June 7, 2017. (HE 
1) Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his 
hearing. (Tr. 12-13) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using video 
teleconference.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; there were no 
objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. (Tr. 16-17; GE 1-5) On 
June 16, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the hearing transcript. After his hearing, 
Applicant provided six exhibits, which were admitted without objection. (Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A-F) 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h, and 
he presented extenuating and mitigating information. (HE 3) Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old network administrator, and he has performed network 
security duties for a DOD contractor for four years.3 (Tr. 5, 7, 19) In 2002, he received a 
General Educational Development (GED) diploma. (Tr. 5-6) He attended college for 
seven years, and in 2015, he received an associate’s degree in network systems 
administration. (Tr. 6) He served in the U.S. Army Reserve from 2003 to present, and he 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this paragraph are Applicant’s June 18, 2015 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (GE 1) 
 
3 
                                         
 
is a staff sergeant. (Tr. 8; AE F) His military occupational specialty (MOS) is network 
systems administrator. (Tr. 8) He has been deployed to Afghanistan twice and to Iraq 
once. (Tr. 8) In 2008, he married, and in 2009, he divorced. (Tr. 6) In 2010, he married, 
and he has an eight-year-old child and step-children who are ages 11 and 13. (Tr. 7)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his unemployment in 2010, his 
divorce, and his spouse’s unemployment. (Tr. 21, 32) He served in Afghanistan from July 
2010 to June 2011. (AE B) He was unable to make payments on some of his debts. (Tr. 
21) His current annual salary is $64,000. (Tr. 19) The status of his eight SOR debts 
totaling $28,439 is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f allege five delinquent student loan debts for 
$9,635; $6,885, $5,372; $421; and $5,166. In March 2017, the five student loan debts 
were consolidated. (Tr. 25) His monthly payment is $647, and on June 27, 2017, the 
creditor for the consolidated student loan wrote that his payment plan is current. (Tr. 25; 
AE A) After he makes payments for 12 months, the Army Reserve will pay $10,000 
towards his student loan under the tuition assistance program. (Tr. 26) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant owes a delinquent debt for $664. The creditor advised 
Applicant that the debt was paid in full on January 28, 2016, and the creditor’s records do 
not show that Applicant owes any debt. (AE C) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h allege delinquent medical debts for $193 and $103. Applicant 
said the two debts are paid. (Tr. 27) Applicant’s March 21, 2017 credit report does not list 
these two medical debts. (GE 4) 
 
Applicant has not had financial counseling. (Tr. 31) He uses a budget, and his 
income is sufficient to pay his expenses, including his student loan payments. (Tr. 33) His 
spouse was unemployed at the time of his hearing. (Tr. 31) Her annual pay was $52,000 
before she lost her employment. (Tr. 32) On July 24, 2017, she became employed at an 
annual salary of $60,000. (AE F) 
 
Applicant’s March 21, 2017 credit report indicates 23 accounts are paid as agreed, 
current, or have a zero balance. (GE 4) The only delinquent account listed in this credit 
report is the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. (GE 4) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s June 18, 2015 SCA asked: (1) is he currently delinquent on any federal 
debt; (2) is he currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt; and (3) in the past seven 
years has he had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency. (GE 1) Applicant 
responded, no, to these questions. (GE 1) He explained that he forgot about or did not 
think about his delinquent debts at the time he completed his SCA. (Tr. 29) 
 
  
 
4 
                                         
 
After his hearing, Applicant elaborated on why he did not disclose his delinquent 
debts on his SCA as follows: 
 
When completing my [SCA] I was unaware that my loans had defaulted. I 
was under the impression that they were still in a deferred status. I know 
that is not a reason to not report them but they were not forefront in my mind 
when filling out the form. I waited [un]till the last minute to complete the 
[SCA] because I was at a stressful point in my life. Because I waited [un]till 
the last minute I accepted a lot of information that had already been input 
from the previous time, since most things were the same as the first time I 
completed it. I skipped over the student loans because they were not on my 
mind during the time I was filling out the form and they were not part of the 
information from the previous time I filled it out and if they were they did not 
show up that way in the form. I was not in any way trying to hide the fact 
that I owed the money nor was I trying to avoid paying the money. (AE D) 
 
When an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator was interviewing 
Applicant, he volunteered that he had received two written warnings from his employer 
for taking a cell phone into a sensitive compartmented information facility or SCIF; 
however, he did not volunteer information about his delinquent debts to the OPM 
investigator. (Tr. 30-31) He explained that the warnings were on his mind and his finances 
were not on his mind. (Tr. 31)    
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s company commander lauded Applicant’s duty performance as follows: 
 
[Applicant] is a bright and personable individual with an outstanding work 
ethic. He is highly self-motivated and well capable of achieving any goal 
he sets his mind to. He is the standard and example for not only Soldiers 
under his charge, but those that out rank him as well. [Applicant] welcomes 
leadership opportunities and meets his deadlines on time. I see [him] as 
invaluable to our unit and put more trust and responsibility in him than 
others far more senior to him. (AE E) 
 
Applicant has received the following awards: Afghanistan Campaign Medal with 
Campaign Star; NATO Afghanistan Service Medal; Joint Service Achievement Medal; 
Army Achievement Medal; Meritorious Unit Commendation (2nd Award); Army Good 
Conduct Medal; Army Reserve Components Achievement Medal (2nd Award); National 
Defense Service Medal; Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal; Global War on 
Terrorism Service Medal; Iraq Campaign Medal with Campaign Star; Army Service 
Ribbon; Overseas Service Ribbon (3rd Award); Armed Forces Reserve Medal with M 
Device; Combat Action Badge; Driver and Mechanic Badge with Driver Wheeled Vehicle 
Clasp; and Driver and Mechanic Badge with Mechanic Badge with Mechanic Clasp. (AE 
B)  
 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
 
6 
                                         
 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, OPM PSI, SOR response, and hearing record. The record establishes the 
 
7 
                                         
 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about 
the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
  
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
  
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
  
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by divorce, unemployment, his 
spouse’s unemployment, and deployment. Applicant’s SOR alleges eight delinquent 
debts totaling $28,439. He paid three SOR debts totaling about $1,000, and five 
delinquent student loan debts totaling $27,479 debts are in a payment plan. There is no 
evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply.  
 
Based on Applicant’s track record of paying or resolving his debts, future new 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of his debts showed good 
faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to continue making 
progress paying his remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will conscientiously 
endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
 
9 
                                         
 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”6 Applicant’s June 18, 2015 
SCA asked: (1) is he currently delinquent on any federal debt; (2) is he currently over 120 
days delinquent on any debt; and (3) in the past seven years has he had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency. Applicant responded, no, to these questions. He 
explained that he believed his student loans were in deferment, and he forgot about or 
did not think about his delinquent debts at the time he completed his SCA. Applicant took 
seven years to receive his associate’s degree, which he received in 2015. He believed 
his student loans were still in deferment when he completed his SCA. His other three 
SOR debts total less than $1,000, and he did not remember them when he was 
completing his SCA. He volunteered information about his two security violations during 
his OPM interview, which is an indication he was not attempting to conceal derogatory 
information from security officials.   
 
I accept Applicant’s statement as credible that he honestly and sincerely believed 
his student loans were in deferment, and he did not remember that he had delinquent 
debts when he completed his SCA. He did not intend to deceive security officials about 
his delinquent debts. He has refuted the allegation that he intentionally failed to disclose 
his delinquent debts on his SCA. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
                                            
6 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
10 
                                         
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and E 
are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old network administrator, and he has performed network 
security duties for a DOD contractor for four years. In 2015, he received an associate’s 
degree in network systems administration. He served in the U.S. Army Reserve from 2003 
to present, and he is a staff sergeant. He has been deployed to Afghanistan twice and to 
Iraq once. In 2008, he married, and in 2009, he divorced. In 2010, he married, and he has 
an eight-year-old child and step-children who are ages 11 and 13. Applicant’s finances 
were adversely affected by divorce, his unemployment, his spouse’s unemployment, and 
deployment.  
 
Applicant’s company commander lauded his duty performance, diligence, and 
leadership. His company commander’s statement supports approval of his access to 
classified information. Applicant served 14 years in the Army Reserve, including two 
combat tours in Afghanistan and one combat tour in Iraq. He has received numerous 
awards for his Army service.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling $28,439. He paid three 
SOR debts totaling about $1,000, and his five delinquent student loan debts totaling 
$27,479 debts are in a payment plan. His most recent credit report and his proof that the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is paid reflect his debts are paid as agreed, are current, or have a zero 
balance. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt payment or 
 
11 
                                         
 
resolution as indicated in his credit reports. He understands what he needs to do to 
establish and maintain his financial responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his 
particular financial circumstances to address his delinquent debts.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. It is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security 
clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
