 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02224 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 17, 2014. On 
October 13, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The 
changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 18, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 
23, 2017, and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on May 12, 2017. It 
was reassigned to me on May 24, 2017, to consolidate the docket. On May 25, 2017, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for June 6, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) A and B, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until July 
10, 2017, to enable both parties to submit additional documentary evidence on an issue 
of predatory lending. Department Counsel submitted GX 4 and Applicant submitted AX 
C through H. All post-hearing exhibits were timely submitted and admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 15, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he incurred the four debts 
alleged, but he stated that he disputed them. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old software support manager employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2010. He has held a security clearance since January 2010. 
 
Applicant has never married, but he lives with his fiancée, and they have an 
eight-year-old daughter and a six-year-old daughter. His fiancée also has a 13-year-old 
daughter from a previous relationship. (Tr. 56.)  
 
Applicant attended a university from August 2005 to April 2006 and a technical 
for-profit institute from September 2006 to September 2010, and he earned a bachelor’s 
degree. His attendance at the institute resulted in the delinquent student loans alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, totaling about $61,948. The student loans are reflected in credit 
reports from September 2015 and August 2016. (GX 2; GX 3.)  
 
The credit reports also reflect the $184 medical bill alleged in SOR 1.d. In 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR and at the hearing, he contended that the medical bill 
was for an x-ray that was unnecessary and unauthorized. He later decided that the 
amount involved did not justify pursuing the dispute, and he paid the bill. (AX H.) 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR and at the hearing, he contended that the 
student loans were the product of predatory lending. He testified that he was 19 years 
old when he began attending the technical institute. He and his classmates found that 
they were pulled out of class, presented with a stack of papers, and told that they would 
be expelled from school if they did not sign them. This process was repeated several 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
times. When Applicant completed all the requirements for graduation, he was told that 
he would not receive his degree if he did not apply for another $3,000 loan. (Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 When the student loan payments became due six months after his graduation, he 
realized for the first time how much he had borrowed. His private loans totaled about 
$65,000 and his Department of Education loans totaled about $50,000. The interest rate 
on the private loans were more than ten percent. He talked to former classmates, who 
also were surprised at the amount of their indebtedness. He was able to have payments 
on the loans deferred for a year. In 2013, he began hearing news about a governmental 
study of predatory lending tactics directed at student loans, and he started looking for 
professional assistance in resolving his student loans. (AX F; Tr. 44-47.) 
 
 In November 2015, Applicant signed a contract with a “risk management” 
company, assigning his debts to the company. (AX G.) The company advised Applicant 
to not make any payments on the student loan debts. (Tr. 48.) Applicant’s answer to the 
SOR includes a letter from the company, stating that they are negotiating a resolution of 
the disputed debts.  
 
Applicant’s contract with the company specifically states that the company is not 
a law firm and does not provide legal representation. It also expressly states that it is 
not a credit counseling service. The contract states, “Company is in the business of risk 
management. Client assigns its rights arising out of alleged debts to Company and 
Company assumes all or a portion of Client’s liabilities as to the valid debts in exchange 
for a payment from Client.” The first page of the contract states, in bold print, “Company 
is not an attorney-at-law and does not give legal advice to Clients.” (AX G at 1, 25.) In 
the event that litigation is necessary, Applicant will be referred to a network of 
participating attorneys, from which he may select an attorney to represent him. The 
contract required Applicant to become a member of the company’s “legal club” or 
another organization that provides substantially similar services and pricing. (AX G at 3, 
6.) The “legal club” provides for a flat fee of $300 if the services of an attorney are 
required. (AX G, Legal Club Member Agreement.) 
 
Applicant submitted a copy of his contract after the hearing, precluding any 
questions about his understanding of it. It is unclear whether he believes that the 
company is a law firm or whether he has hired an attorney from the company’s network 
of participating attorneys. It is likely that he believes that the company is acting as his 
lawyer. In Applicant’s testimony at the hearing, he referred to “my lawyer’s retainer fees” 
and “my attorney’s office.” His list of monthly expenses submitted at the hearing 
includes monthly payments of $244 for “lawyer fees.” (AX B.) This amount corresponds 
to paragraph 5(f) of his contract with the company, which provides for a fee totaling 
$16,560, payable at $240 per month. (AX G at 5.) 
 
 In February 2014, the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau filed suit against the 
institute, alleging that it used high-pressure tactics to coerce students into high-interest 
private loans that were likely to end in default. (GX 4 at 2; AX D.) In August 2016, the 
U.S. Department of Education banned the institute from enrolling students who receive 
 
4 
 
federal aid, and it doubled the surety funds the institute was required to have. In 
September 2016, the institute ceased operations and closed all its locations, attributing 
its closing to the Department of Education’s actions. (GX 4 at 3; AX C.) 
  
 In 2016, Applicant’s gross income was about $111,511. His after-tax income was 
about $85,876, or about $7,156. (AX A.) His monthly expenses, including payment on a 
Department of Education student loan and a monthly payment of $244 for “lawyer fees,” 
total about $4,123, leaving him a net monthly remainder of about $3,303. (AX B.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant’s brother-in-law (the husband of Applicant’s sister) 
testified that he served for more than nine years in the Navy, working as an intelligence 
analyst and in counterintelligence, and he has known Applicant for about seven years. 
He regards Applicant as a person of “stand up” character who is dedicated to his job 
and a “one hundred percent reliable candidate to hold a security clearance.” (Tr. 25-26.) 
Applicant’s supervisor since 2010 testified that he regards him as a “powerhouse for his 
unique skills” and a “very upstanding solid person.” (Tr. 30-33.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
5 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
 
6 
 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports submitted at the hearing establish 
the three delinquent student loans and one unpaid medical bill alleged in the SOR, and 
they are sufficient to establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts 
regardless of the ability to do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-
profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and were 
not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the three student loans. The evidence establishes 
that Applicant was the victim of predatory lending practices. He acted responsibly by 
obtaining deferments on the loan payments and then seeking professional assistance 
when he learned about the institute’s predatory loan practices.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant’s contract with the company expressly 
states that it is not a credit counseling service. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the medical debt. Although Applicant initially 
disputed the debt, it has been paid in full. 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, 
sincere, and credible at the hearing. He has a reputation for technical proficiency and 
personal reliability. While I am not convinced that he understands all the implications of 
his contract with the “risk management” company, he is determined to resolve the 
delinquent student loans and he has taken significant steps toward a solution. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating 
all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
