 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02187 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 24, 2015. On 
November 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
E.1 Applicant responded to the SOR on December 8, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on January 11, 2017, and the hearing was convened on 
January 31, 2017. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 8, 2017. 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old background investigator sponsored for a security 
clearance by a defense contractor. She received a bachelor’s degree in 1999 and has 
been married since 2007. She has one child who is three years old. She is currently 
employed in two part-time jobs as an investigator, beginning in 2014. Applicant previously 
worked for a government background investigation company from 2004 to 2013, 
conducting investigations for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). She was 
terminated from this position due to poor performance, and was later notified that she was 
found to have falsified investigative reports. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant was fired from her previous position in December 2013 
after an investigation found she falsified investigative reports, and for falsification of her 
SCA when she failed to list the falsifications, rather she listed being terminated after her 
statistics dropped while she was pregnant and after her daughter was born, resulting in 
poor performance. Applicant admitted that she falsified investigations, typically by 
reporting that she interviewed various sources and reviewed records, despite failing to do 
so. She claimed her pregnancy, maternity leave and having a baby contributed to being 
overwhelmed with pressure to complete more investigations in a shorter period of time. 
 
An investigation by OPM resulted in reinvestigation of 72 cases and re-contact of 
157 sources. It confirmed that Applicant submitted 14 confirmed falsified investigative 
reports, between April and November 2013, with an additional 73 sources showing 
falsification indicators but did not contain enough information to confirm falsifications. 
OPM removed Applicant from the contract in December 2013. She was notified that she 
was terminated for poor performance. She was aware of the investigation into her work 
before she was terminated, but did not learn of the results of the investigation until 2015 
when she learned that OPM had recommended debarment. In September 2015, OPM 
recommended Applicant be disbarred from further government contract work. She 
submitted information in mitigation, and in April 2016, the debarment authority determined 
that no further action would be taken on the recommendation. 
 
Applicant submitted training certificates and character statements from employers 
and others who know her. She is generally described as loyal, kind, honest, and 
trustworthy. Her testimony was credible and sincere. She testified that this was an 
unusual period in her life and she was unable to meet the increasing pressure to complete 
more cases in a shorter time. She said she is now a different person that would not 
succumb to similar pressures, takes her work seriously, and understands the importance 
of truthful reporting. She has since worked as an investigator for two companies and has 
performed well. 
 
Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. My ultimate decision would 
be the same under either set of adjudicative guidelines. 
 
3 
 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
4 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E; Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
. . .  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources. 
Applicant’s work for an OPM contractor resulted in confirmed cases of falsification, 
with many more suspected but unconfirmed cases. She was terminated for poor 
performance, but did not receive notification of allegations of falsification until she 
received the debarment recommendation in late 2015 after she completed her SCA, 
therefore I find that she did not falsify her SCA. AG ¶ 16(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
5 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 
and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances of Applicant’s work product as a 
security clearance investigator. Her falsification of numerous investigative reports to 
maintain performance statistics involved personal breaches of integrity. The explanation 
for her poor performance and falsifying important reports rings hollow given the potential 
security implications. For a security clearance investigator, her actions did not constitute 
a minor offense, and insufficient time has passed to reconsider her for a clearance. Her 
actions during stressful conditions create substantial doubt about her overall 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment as an investigator, and ultimately on her 
worthiness to hold a security clearance. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.               
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In particular I considered Applicant’s 
years of contractor service, her pregnancy and personal stressors at the time, and her 
work since being terminated. However, I also considered that she conducted false 
security clearance investigations that ultimately resulted in her termination and a 
recommendation for debarment. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
6 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
