 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03452 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated January 12, 2016). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 29, 2016. On January 17, 2017, he 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on February 17, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2017.  A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on May 3, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 21, 2017. 
 
 During the hearing, two Government exhibits (GE) 1 and GE 2 were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 
29, 2017. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage 
of that opportunity and timely submitted a number of documents, which were marked and 
admitted as Applicant exhibits (AE) A through AE K, without objection. The record closed 
on August 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the sole factual allegation pertaining 
to financial considerations (¶ 1.a.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admission is incorporated 
herein as a finding of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a 
systems administrator with the company since April 2016. He previously held a variety of 
relatively short-term positions with other employers between December 2009 and April 
2016. He was unemployed from August 2015 until October 2015, and self-employed from 
August 2008 until December 2009. He is a June 1990 high school graduate, and he has 
several college credits, but no degree. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in August 
1990, and he served on active duty until October 1999. In October 2011, he entered the 
U.S. Air Force Reserve. He was granted a top-secret security clearance in June 1991, 
access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in August 1997, and a secret 
security clearance in October 2009. Applicant was married in May 2001 and divorced in 
February 2010. He remarried in April 2010. He has a 17-year old stepson as well as a 
stepdaughter with whom he does not communicate.  
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously issued 
national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Military Service, and Awards and Decorations 
 
 During Applicant’s period of active duty, he was awarded the Air Force 
Achievement Medal, the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award (two awards), the Air Force 
Good Conduct Medal (three awards), the National Defense Service Medal, the Air Force 
Overseas Short Tour Ribbon (two awards), the Air Force Longevity Service Award Ribbon 
(two awards), the Non-Commissioned Officer Professional Military Education Graduate 
Ribbon, and the Air Force Training Ribbon.3 Applicant’s enlisted performance reports 
generally improved each year, and when he received his most recent active duty report, 
covering 1998, his performance was rated as the best of all categories, and he was 
recommended for immediate promotion. His most recent assessments as a member of 
the Air Force Reserve are a mixture of above average and truly among the best.4 
 
Financial Considerations5 
It is unclear what Applicant’s personal finances were like before they deteriorated. 
He apparently had some financial issues several years earlier, but according to Applicant, 
they had been resolved. In October 2014, in an effort to consolidate his debts to reduce 
his total monthly payments, Applicant applied online for a $23,031 loan. At that time, his 
annual salary was about $90,000. His debts were merely the result of “just normal 
dealings, day-to-day life,” without any specific reasons.6 None of the accounts that he 
sought to consolidate was delinquent. Applicant experienced his first serious delinquency 
when he became unemployed in August 2015. His wife started working. Although he was 
not receiving unemployment benefits, they had sufficient savings to help carry them 
financially for a short time. He also obtained a $1,000 loan from a friend to assist in 
covering living expenses. Although Applicant obtained another job in October 2015, for 
reasons not fully explained except that he was scrambling to make sure he could pay 
everything else, Applicant was unable to resume his monthly payments to the creditor. 
The account became delinquent, was placed for collection, charged off, and sold.  
In January 2016, a collection agent sent Applicant an email regarding the account, 
and eventually started calling him. Applicant did not take any steps to address the debt 
after it was placed for collection.7 The unpaid balance on the account increased to 
$25,091.17. Applicant continued ignoring the debt because it was so big.8 Instead, he set 
up a plan. He sought cheaper housing, reduced spending, and increased income. He 
prioritized a list of things that needed attention such as shelter and food. He paid off his 
                                                          
3 AE C (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated October 31, 1999); AE D 
(Air Force Achievement Medal, dated February 12, 1997). 
 
4 AE E (Enlisted Performance Reports, various dates). 
 
5 General source information pertaining to the financial issues discussed below can be found in GE 2 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated October 3, 2016).  
 
6 Tr. at 28-29. 
 
7 Tr. at 35-36. 
 
8 Tr. at 47-50 
 
4 
                                      
 
truck. During the hearing, Applicant stated that he had a budget, but he acknowledged 
that it was out of date in light of the new repayment agreement. He also acknowledged 
that he had never received credit counseling.9 He subsequently indicated that he was 
scheduled for credit counseling, but the date of such counseling was late August 2017. 
Applicant made no effort to contact the creditor until the day of the hearing – six 
months after the SOR was received. On June 21, 2017, mere hours before the hearing, 
Applicant called the current creditor to set up a repayment plan. Under that agreement, 
commencing on the day following the hearing, Applicant was expected to make 60 
monthly payments of $209.09.10 He submitted evidence of payments for June 22, 2017, 
July 10, 2017, and July 24, 2017.11  
During the hearing, Applicant stated that his annual salary rose to $97,500, 
effective in April 2017, and he anticipated earning $700 from his reserve activities over 
the entire year. He estimated a net monthly income of $6,000, and $800 in disposable 
income. He also indicated that his wife was expected to return to work in July 2017 with 
an annual salary of $30,000. It does not appear that she did so. Applicant submitted a 
Personal Financial Statement to reflect $5,818 as his net monthly income; $3,330 in 
normal monthly expenses plus $1,231.10 in debt payments; and a monthly remainder of 
$178 available for discretionary spending or savings.12 Applicant contends that he has no 
other delinquencies, but he acknowledged that the accounts that he had initially sought 
to pay off with the consolidation loan now have increased, but not delinquent, balances. 
He also acknowledged owing approximately $15,000 in court-mandated debts associated 
with his divorce from his ex-wife. It appears that Applicant’s finances are under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”13 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
                                                          
 
9 Tr. at 51-52. 
 
10 AE A (Letter, dated June 21, 2017); Tr. at 36-38. 
 
11 AE I (Check, dated June 22, 2017); AE J (Check, dated July 10, 2017); AE K (Check, dated July 24, 2017). 
 
12 AE F (Personal Financial Statement, dated August 1, 2017). Applicant also submitted a separate list of the 
bills he currently has, and while some of the numbers differ from the information set forth in his Personal Financial 
Statement, they are sufficiently similar. One exception is the difference in the remainder figures he submitted. The 
Personal Financial Statement shows $178, but the separate list reflects a remainder of $564. See AE G (List, undated). 
 
13 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”14   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”15 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.16  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”17  
                                                          
14 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
15 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”18 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 
19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, ¶ 19(b) may 
apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.” 
Similarly, under ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. Applicant obtained a personal loan to pay off other debts, but he failed to make 
the required monthly payments and the account became delinquent. It was charged off. 
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) apply.  
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under ¶ 20(b), 
financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in the 
                                                          
18 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received or is 
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under ¶ 20(c). Similarly, ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”19  
I have concluded that ¶ 20(c) applies and ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) partially apply. ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial 
difficulties since about 2015 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or 
“was so infrequent,” or that it is “unlikely to recur.” As noted above, there was only one 
factor that occurred in August 2015 – unemployment – and that factor only lasted until 
October 2015. That situation was largely beyond his control, but since that status only 
lasted for two months, it is clearly a somewhat stale and limited issue which, over time, 
or at least during 2016, should have been overcome.  
Applicant obtained employment in October 2015, and his annual salary eventually 
rose to $97,500, effective in April 2017. He estimated a net monthly income of $6,000, 
and $800 in disposable income. Yet, there is little evidence that he made any good-faith 
efforts to address his debt after he became, once again, employed. Instead, he simply 
ignored that delinquent account and focused on spending his available funds elsewhere, 
like paying off his truck loan rather than making any payments on his delinquent debt. 
Applicant’s position indicates the absence of any priority to timely address his aging debt. 
Applicant never received financial counseling. However, because Applicant eventually 
agreed to a repayment plan, and he is adhering to that good-faith effort to repay his 
overdue creditor, it appears that he is finally in the process of resolving his sole delinquent 
debt. Applicant’s financial problems are now under control. Under the circumstances, 
Applicant did not act responsibly by failing to address his one delinquent account until the 
                                                          
19 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
morning of the hearing.20 Nevertheless, Applicant’s most recent actions have removed 
any doubt regarding his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.21 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.22   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. In October 2014, 
in an effort to consolidate his debts and to reduce his total monthly payments, Applicant 
obtained a $23,031 loan. At that time, his annual salary was about $90,000. Applicant was 
unemployed from August 2015 until October 2015, and his finances were negatively 
impacted. He made no payments on the loan, preferring to focus on other accounts. The 
account became delinquent, was placed for collection, charged off, and sold. Even after 
he obtained a new position, with a substantial salary, he continued to ignore the one 
delinquent account. Instead, he chose to pay off his truck loan. Applicant made no effort 
to contact the creditor until the day of the hearing – six months after the SOR was 
received. On June 21, 2017, mere hours before the hearing, Applicant called the current 
creditor to set up a repayment plan.  
                                                          
20 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
21 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
22 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. Applicant is an active duty veteran who is currently serving in the U.S. Air 
Force Reserve. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or 
mishandling protected information. There was one factor that contributed to Applicant’s 
financial issues, and that was his brief period of unemployment. Applicant finally 
approached the creditor of his delinquent, charged-off account, and entered into a 
repayment agreement. He is adhering to that good-faith effort to repay his overdue 
creditor, and he has submitted evidence of payments for June 22, 2017, July 10, 2017, 
and July 24, 2017. Applicant’s financial problems are now under control. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:23 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has finally demonstrated a fair track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, aggressively avoiding his only long-standing debt until hours before 
the hearing. His efforts were supposedly hindered, in part, by his brief period of 
unemployment, but once that situation was corrected, there was little change in his efforts. 
With an annual salary of over $90,000, Applicant initially chose to ignore his debt, but he 
finally reversed his direction. Overall, the evidence no longer leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG ¶ 2(d)(9). 
 
  
                                                          
23 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:     For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
