 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00682 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On July 1, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR alleged 
                                                          
1 Item 5 (e-QIP, dated June 3, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 18, 2016. In a sworn statement, dated July 28, 
2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant 
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) on September 20, 2016, and she was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 
30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the 
Directive as well as the previous Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to her case. Applicant 
received the FORM on September 26, 2016. Applicant’s response was due on October 
26, 2016. Applicant timely submitted a number of documents, to which there was no 
objection. The case was assigned to me on July 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, two of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) and both of the factual 
allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.) of the SOR. She also 
furnished comments regarding the remaining allegations. Applicant’s admissions and 
comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a 
geospatial analyst with the company since August 2009, with the exception of the period 
from July 2014 until November 2014, when she was laid off during a reduction in force. 
She previously held a similar position with another company from July 2004 until July 
2009. She is a June 1992 high school graduate, and she received a bachelor’s degree in 
an unspecified discipline in June 1997. Applicant has never served in the U.S. military. 
She was granted a secret security clearance in 2001. Applicant was married in July 1998. 
She has two sons, born in 2002 and 2005.  
 
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously issued 
national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 Item 4 (Answer to the SOR, dated July 28, 2016). 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations4 
It is unclear what Applicant’s finances were like before they deteriorated. In 
October 2000, because of a reduction in force, Applicant’s employer laid her off. She 
remained unemployed until May 2001. During that period, she was supported by bi-
weekly state unemployment compensation of between $200 and $300. In 2002, Applicant 
and her family relocated from one state (with a moderate cost of living) to another state 
(with a much higher cost of living). In March 2004, Applicant and her husband filed a 
petition for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. An unspecified number 
of debts was discharged in June 2004, and except for the accounts that were reaffirmed, 
they were furnished a clean financial slate. Applicant candidly acknowledged that the 
debts that they had accrued were the result of the higher costs of living and living beyond 
their means. Although she did not specifically identify other possible factors, she 
acknowledged that both of her children have a variety of dysfunctions, learning 
disabilities, and therapy needs. 
During the earlier years of their marriage, Applicant’s husband managed all of their 
bills and their taxes. She handled the child-related activities such as medical 
appointments and extra-curricular activities. In December 2012, with the exception of the 
student loans, Applicant took control over all the family bills. She explained that over the 
past few years, leading up to 2015, she learned from experience that her husband is not 
good at handling the family finances, and that she needed to do so. In order to prevent 
any further future financial issues, Applicant has now taken control over all financial 
aspects of their life with the exception of the family health insurance that is derived 
through her husband’s employer. 
In addition to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy, the SOR identified three purportedly 
delinquent debts that had been placed for collection, as generally reflected by her 
September 2007 credit report, the June 2015 credit report, or her June 2016 credit report. 
Those debts, totaling approximately $74,812, their current status, according to the credit 
reports, other evidence submitted by the Government, and Applicant’s comments 
regarding same, are described below. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is a state tax lien for $1,051 that was placed for collection in 
October 2014. Applicant contended that her husband made a mistake on their 2010 taxes 
when he accidentally omitted a form related to income. The Internal Revenue Service 
notified Applicant and her husband, and she took care of the larger federal bill and asked 
her husband to handle the smaller state bill. She presumed that he did so, but he 
apparently did not. She said she was unaware of the lien until it was brought to her 
attention by the investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 
November 2015. On December 8, 2015 – seven months before the SOR was issued – 
                                                          
4 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 5, supra note 1; Item 4, supra note 3; Item 8 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, 
dated September 7, 2007); Item 7 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 10, 2015); 
Item 6 (Equifax Credit Report, dated June 8, 2016).  
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant paid the state comptroller $1,051.64, and the lien was released as satisfied.5 
The account has been resolved. 
 (SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is a combined student loan account with a high credit of 
$55,917 that was placed for collection in November 2014 with a past-due and unpaid 
balance of $73,412. There initially were separate student loans in a deferred status, and 
then apparently in a default status. The loans were transferred to a variety of servicing 
agents and the U.S. Government before being returned to another servicing agent and a 
collection agency. Applicant’s husband had the loans consolidated in his name with 
Applicant’s name listed as the secondary borrower.  
Applicant was not aware that he had failed to make the payments on the loans 
until the OPM investigator told her. In July 2016, Applicant and the collection agent set 
up a repayment plan under which she agreed to make $150 monthly payments, 
commencing on August 15, 2016.6 Applicant failed to submit any documentation such as 
receipts, cancelled checks, account statements, or creditor acknowledgments that 
supports her contention that she is paying the account. In the absence of such 
documentation, it is difficult to determine if Applicant is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue debt. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a cellular telephone account with a past-due and unpaid 
balance of $349 that was placed for collection. Applicant stated that in March 2015, she 
switched carriers and continued making monthly payments to her old carrier to cover 
usage fees. According to the contract with the new carrier, that carrier was supposed to 
pay the termination fee of the old carrier. It failed to do so. After months of arguing with 
the new carrier, the termination fee was finally paid in mid-March 2016 – three months 
before the SOR was issued. The old carrier, which is once again her present carrier, 
acknowledged that payment had been received, and it instructed the credit reporting 
agencies to correct the information in Applicant’s credit reports.7 The account has been 
resolved. 
Applicant did not submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect her net monthly 
income; monthly expenses; or any monthly remainder that might be available for 
discretionary spending or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence 
of any financial counseling. There is also no evidence of any other delinquent accounts. 
Because the remaining accounts in her most recent credit report are listed as current, 
and Applicant has taken nearly full responsibility over her finances, it appears that 
Applicant’s finances are under control. 
  
                                                          
5 Release of [State] Tax Lien, dated December 8, 2015, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
6 Letter, dated July 28, 2016, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
7 E-mail, dated October 25, 2016, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Personal Conduct 
 On June 3, 2015, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she responded to certain 
questions pertaining to her financial record. The questions in Section 26 – Financial 
Record asked if, in the past seven years, she had: defaulted on any type of loan; bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency; or if any debts are or were 120 or more days 
delinquent.  Applicant answered “no” to those questions. In the same e-QIP section, there 
was another question that asked if, in the past seven years, she had a lien placed against 
her property for failing to pay taxes or other debts. While she answered “yes” to the 
question, she identified a home owner’s association (HOA) lien, but she failed to disclose 
the existence of a state tax lien. She certified that the responses were “true, complete, 
and correct” to the best of her knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions 
were, in fact, false.  
 
 Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify her responses, and explained 
that, when she completed the e-QIP, she was unaware that the accounts were delinquent 
or that there was a state tax lien. Before completing the e-QIP, she ran three credit checks 
on herself but they failed to register the delinquencies. 
Community Activities 
 Applicant is involved in her children’s lives. Her children are involved in activities 
outside of school. Those extracurricular activities for just one week include three karate 
classes, a scout meeting, a five-mile scout hike, a student government meeting, a 
yearbook club meeting, two football practices, one football game, one lacrosse game, 
one junior fire cadet meeting, and one canine training class. 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”8 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”9   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
                                                          
8 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
9 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”10 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.11  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
10 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 
19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, ¶ 19(b) may 
apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.” 
Similarly, under ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. “Consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other negative financial indicators” 
may raise concerns under ¶ 19(e). Applicant’s earlier period of sometimes living beyond 
her means before 2004, and her inability to satisfy all of her debts allowed them to become 
delinquent. In June 2004 most of her debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the U.S. 
Bankruptcy Code. Subsequently, a state tax lien was filed, student loans went into default, 
and another account became delinquent. ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply; ¶ 19(e) partially 
applies; and ¶19(b) does not apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under ¶ 20(b), 
financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received or is 
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
 
8 
                                      
 
is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under ¶ 20(c). Similarly, ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”14 In addition, ¶ 20(e) 
may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
I have concluded that ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) partially apply. ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply. Applicant’s financial issues arose for two different reasons separated by a 
substantial period of time. The earlier situation generally arose because of several factors. 
Applicant was unemployed from October 2000 until May 2001; Applicant and her husband 
had to relocate to a higher cost of living location; and they were sometimes living beyond 
her means. Things essentially changed in 2004 when Applicant’s liabilities were 
discharged by bankruptcy. There did not appear to be anything unusual about Applicant’s 
finances for several years thereafter. Applicant’s husband was purportedly managing the 
family finances, but issues arose that he failed to properly address. When Applicant 
learned of his mismanagement of their finances, she took control over them – before the 
SOR was issued. She contacted her creditors in a good-faith effort to resolve her 
delinquent accounts, and she either set up repayment arrangements or paid the 
outstanding balances. While there is no evidence of a budget or financial counseling, 
there is also no evidence of other delinquent accounts. There is no evidence of any 
disputes being made. Applicant’s efforts resulted in the successful resolution of two of the 
three listed SOR accounts. The one remaining, and largest account, is in a repayment 
plan, but without documentation to confirm that Applicant has been making the required 
monthly payments, it is difficult to determine that she is adhering to the plan.  
 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously; nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time.  
 
                                                          
14 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Under the circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly by addressing her 
delinquent accounts and by initiating efforts to work with her creditors.15 Applicant’s 
actions under the circumstances no longer cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.16 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in ¶ 
18: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 16(a), 
it is potentially disqualifying if there is a 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
                                                          
15 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
 
 As noted above, on June 3, 2015, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she 
responded to questions pertaining to her financial record. One set of questions in Section 
26 – Financial Record asked if, in the past seven years, she had: defaulted on any type 
of loan; bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; or if any debts are or were 120 
or more days delinquent. Applicant answered “no” to those questions. She certified that 
the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge and belief, 
but the response to those questions was, in fact, false. Applicant subsequently denied 
intending to falsify her response, and offered one explanation for her response: at the 
time she completed her e-QIP, she was unaware that her student loans were delinquent 
because she was under the impression that her husband had been making the necessary 
payments. She only learned the truth when the OPM investigator informed her that the 
student loans were delinquent. 
 
 In the same e-QIP section, there was another question that asked if, in the past 
seven years, she had a lien placed against her property for failing to pay taxes or other 
debts. While she answered “yes” to the question, she identified an HOA lien, but she 
failed to disclose the existence of a state tax lien. She certified that the response was 
“true, complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge and belief, but the response to 
that question was, in fact, false. Once again, Applicant subsequently denied intending to 
falsify her response, and explained that, when she completed the e-QIP, she was 
unaware that there was a state tax lien. When Applicant first learned about her husband’s 
mistake that led to the tax problem, she took care of the federal issue and her husband 
was supposed to take care of the lesser state issue. He apparently failed to do so, and 
his failure resulted in the tax lien about which she knew nothing. 
 
Applicant’s comments provide sufficient evidence to examine if her submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely an omission that was the 
result of oversight or misunderstanding of the true facts on her part. Proof of an omission, 
standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when 
the falsification or omission occurred. As an administrative judge, I must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is a direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning Applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the alleged falsification 
or omission occurred. I have considered the entire record.17 Her statements are 
                                                          
17 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See 
also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of education and other 
experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to disclose past-due debts on a security 
clearance application was deliberate).  
 
11 
                                      
 
unwavering and consistent. In the e-QIP, Applicant acknowledged the existence of the 
HOA lien, thus placing the issue of a potential financial problem on the table for 
investigation and discussion.  Based on the evidence presented, I have concluded that 
there is no negative direct or circumstantial evidence concerning Applicant’s intent or 
state of mind at the time the omission occurred. She candidly explained her reasons for 
her e-QIP responses, and recognizing the Government’s burden of proving falsification, I 
have concluded that Department Counsel has failed to carry that burden. Applicant’s 
actions, under the circumstances, do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. In this instance, ¶ 16(a) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.18   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. During an 
unspecified period before 2004, Applicant sometimes lived beyond her means. Her 
inability to satisfy all of her debts allowed them to become delinquent. In June 2004, most 
of her debts were discharged in bankruptcy. Subsequently, a state tax lien was filed, 
student loans went into default, and another account became delinquent. She submitted 
no financial information to indicate her current financial status, and she failed to submit 
documentation to reflect that she is adhering to a good-faith effort to pay her student loans. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or 
                                                          
 
18 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
mishandling protected information. As noted above, Applicant was laid off and 
unemployed from July 2014 until November 2014, before being brought back by her 
employer. When Applicant learned of her husband’s mismanagement of their finances, 
she took control over them – before the SOR was issued. She contacted her creditors in 
a good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent accounts, and she either set up repayment 
arrangements or paid the outstanding balances. Applicant’s efforts resulted in the 
successful resolution of two of the three listed SOR accounts. The one remaining, and 
largest account, is in a repayment plan. Unfortunately, Applicant failed to submit 
documentation to confirm that she has been making the required monthly payments. 
There is also no evidence of other delinquent accounts. She candidly acknowledged 
having a financial issue when she completed her e-QIP.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:19 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a positive track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, addressing her debts and taking control of her finances from her 
husband, and she started to do so before the SOR was issued. This decision should serve 
as a warning that Applicant’s failure to continue her resolution efforts with respect to her 
student loans, or the actual accrual of new delinquent debts, will adversely affect her 
future eligibility for a security clearance.20 
                                                          
19 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
20 While this decision should serve as a warning to Applicant as security officials may continue to monitor his 
finances, this decision, including the warning, should not be interpreted as a conditional eligibility to hold a security 
clearance. DOHA has no authority to attach limiting conditions to an applicant’s security clearance. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See 
also ISCR Case No. 06-26686 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006); 
 
13 
                                      
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial considerations 
and personal conduct. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG ¶ 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
ISCR Case No. 04-04302 at 5 (App. Bd. June 30, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-17410 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005); ISCR 
Case No. 99-0109 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). 
 
