 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00292 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but she did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on July 8, 
2016, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on August 19, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 2, 2016. As 
of October 11, 2016, she had not responded. The case was assigned to me on July 5, 
2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
the same employer since 1986. She attended college for a period without earning a 
degree. She married in 1988 and divorced in 1998. She has two adult children.1 
  
 Applicant has a history of state and federal tax issues. Her employer reported 
through the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) that it received a $5,000 wage 
garnishment from the state in 2004 for tax year 2001; a $23,608 garnishment from the 
IRS in 2006; and a $7,298 garnishment from the state in 2012.2 
 
 Applicant discussed her taxes during background interviews in 2002, 2006, 2007, 
2008, and 2015. She indicated the old state garnishment was a mistake related to her 
filing status, the state acknowledged she filed correctly, and the taxes were paid. In 
2007, she discussed the 2006 IRS garnishment for tax year 2003. She stated that she 
liquidated some mutual funds; the original amount of the tax owed was $2,699; the IRS 
garnished about $1,000 from her pay; and she was paying $100 per month. In 2008, 
she stated that she had been paying the IRS, and the balance was down to between 
$100 and $200.3 
 
 The IRS filed a $70,063 tax lien against Applicant in December 2014. In her 
October 2015 background interview, she stated the lien was for tax years 2006 through 
2009 when she claimed too many personal exemptions, and the IRS disallowed some 
of her deductions. She stated that she paid $442 per month from 2010 to 2014, but the 
payments were not coded properly, leading to her not being credited with the payments 
and the IRS issuing the tax lien. She stated that the IRS resolved the discrepancy, and 
in the fall of 2014, she set up a $700 per month payroll deduction to the IRS. She stated 
that the IRS informed her that the lien would be released by the spring of 2015. She 
also stated that her 2014 income tax refund was diverted to pay her back taxes. In her 
response to the SOR, she stated that the lien was still in effect, but the wage 
garnishment had been lifted, and she was voluntarily paying $800 per month.4 
 
 Applicant did not submit any documentation to corroborate payments to the IRS. 
The $70,063 lien is listed as unreleased on the May 2016 credit report.5  
 
 Applicant’s wages have been garnished since 2011 for spousal support. 
Applicant stated the divorce order granted her ex-husband alimony while he was 
unemployed. The order remained in effect, but was uncollected, after he went back to 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 8. 
 
2 Items 3-6, 8, 14. These tax matters were not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. They may be considered in assessing mitigation and during the whole-person analysis.  
 
3 Items 3-6, 8, 14. 
 
4 Items 8, 12, 13. 
 
5 Item 13. 
 
3 
 
work. Her employer reported in May 2016 that the original amount of the garnishment 
was $82,527, plus $2,000 attorney’s fees. It indicated that approximately $46,391 had 
been garnished up to that date. The garnishment at that time was $173 per week.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $216 medical debt. The debt is listed by all three credit 
reporting agencies on the June 2015 combined credit report. Applicant stated that she 
paid the debt when she became aware of it. The debt is not listed on the May 2016 
credit report.7 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
June 2015. She answered “No” to all the financial questions under Section 26, including 
the following: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, have been failed to file or pay Federal, state, 
or other taxes when required by law or ordnance?  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had a lien placed against your property 
for failing to pay taxes or other debts? (Include financial obligations for 
which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a 
cosigner or guarantor).  
 
You are currently delinquent on any Federal debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor). 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor 
or guarantor) 
 
You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor)8 
 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. She stated that she had been 
paying the IRS; the garnishment had been lifted; and she thought the garnishment and 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 14. 
 
7 Items 12, 13. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
 
4 
 
the lien were the same thing.9 After considering all the evidence, I find there is 
insufficient evidence for a determination that she intentionally falsified the SF 86. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
9 Items 1, 8. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 The IRS filed a $70,063 tax lien against Applicant in December 2014 for unpaid 
taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant’s explanation for the spousal support garnishment is logical and 
accepted. The garnishment and the medical debt do not generate security concerns. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are concluded for Applicant.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has a history of tax problems culminating in a $70,063 tax lien. Failure 
to comply with tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-
established government rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with rules and 
systems is essential for protecting classified information. See e.g. ISCR Case No. 14-
06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016). She stated, without corroborating documentation, 
that she has been paying her back taxes. The Appeal Board has held that “it is 
reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 
2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)). Applicant’s 
evidence falls short of mitigating her history of shirking her responsibility to pay her 
taxes.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally 
falsified her SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
long and stable work history with the same employer. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but she did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
