 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-00371 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to mitigate the Guideline E 
(personal conduct) trustworthiness concerns raised by her marriage and cohabitation 
with an illegal alien and her lack of concern for U.S. law. Eligibility to hold a position of 
public trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire (Application) requesting eligibility 
for a position of trust on August 28, 2015. After reviewing it and the information 
gathered during a background investigation, on June 15, 2016, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline E.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2016, admitting the SOR allegation. 
She submitted no additional statements or documents, and requested a decision based 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), outlining the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter, dated 
August 10, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 17, 2016. She was allowed 
30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on June 27, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
her unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator 
from October 6, 2015. (FORM, Item 3) Applicant was informed she could object to the 
summary of her interview and it would not be admitted or considered by me, or that she 
could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. Applicant was informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise 
any objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence 
would be considered by me. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I admitted the 
FORM with its proffered evidence, and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her SOR answer, Applicant admitted that she is married to an illegal alien from 
Mexico with whom she has been residing since 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Her admission is 
incorporated herein as a finding of fact. After a thorough review of the FORM evidence, 
I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school in 2004, completed some college work without earning a degree, and then 
received training at a vocational-technical school in 2015. Her employment history 
shows that she has been working since about 2004, sometimes part-time while 
studying, and sometimes holding two jobs at the same time. A federal contractor hired 
Applicant in October 2015. She requires eligibility for a position of public trust for her 
current job. This is her first application for a position of public trust. 
 
In Applicant’s 2015 trustworthiness application, she disclosed that she was 
engaged to be married to a citizen of Mexico, who was residing illegally in the United 
States and with whom she had been cohabitating since 2012. They have a four-year-old 
son. Applicant explained that her betrothed’s parents entered the United States illegally 
when he was about three years old. Her parents-in-law and her husband have resided 
illegally in the United States since, and they have not applied for U.S. citizenship.  
 
Applicant stated she intended to sponsor her then fiancé (now spouse) 
citizenship application as soon as they are married. According to Applicant, her fiancé 
has a U.S. social security number and he has been filing and paying U.S. taxes since 
2004. Applicant believes her spouse is a responsible citizen who has no criminal record 
 
3 
 
 
and maintains little or no contact with other Mexican citizens. (FORM, Item 3, October 
2015 interview) 
 
Policies 
 
In issuing the SOR, DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation);1 and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The case 
will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility For Access To Classified Information 
or Eligibility To Hold A Sensitive Position (AG), which are applicable to all adjudicative 
decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
The DOD considers ADP positions to be sensitive positions. For a person to be 
eligible for sensitive duties, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be 
such that assigning the person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States. SEAD 4, E(4); SEAD 4, App. A ¶ 1.d. 
Applicants for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination is made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interest of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
                                            
1 ADP cases are adjudicated under the provisions of the Directive. (Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 
2004.) 
 
4 
 
 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government. Access to sensitive information determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials. SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). 
Eligibility for a public trust position decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not 
met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing access to sensitive 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
  Applicant is married to a citizen of Mexico, who is an illegal alien in the United 
States. They have been cohabitating since 2012, and they have a four-year-old son 
born in the United States of this relationship. Applicant’s spouse is in violation of U.S. 
immigration laws. Applicant also could be engaging in a felony for violating 8 U.S. Code 
Section 1324 (“Bringing in and harboring certain aliens - (a) Criminal penalties - (1)(A) 
Any person who . . . . (iv) encourages or induces an alien to come to, enter, or reside in 
the United States, knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact that such coming to, 
entry, or residence is or will be in violation of law”). Applicant’s actions trigger the 
applicability of the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
 person's personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists three conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
None of the above mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s spouse is in 
violation of U.S. immigration laws. Applicant’s cohabitation with her spouse may be in 
violation of 8 U.S. Code, Section 1324, a felony. 
Applicant stated in her 2015 trustworthiness Application that she intended to 
sponsor her husband’s U.S. residency and citizenship applications as soon as they 
were married. She presented no documentary evidence to show the status of such 
applications or the legality of her spouse’s residence in the United States.  
I note that Applicant has been truthful and candid about her relationship with an 
illegal alien. Thus, she has reduced or eliminated her vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. Notwithstanding, a person who requests eligibility for a position 
of trust must demonstrate sound judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Her relationship with an illegal alien 
demonstrates a disregard for the laws of the United States and casts doubts on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate the Guideline E security concerns.  
Whole-Person Concept 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d), and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
 
6 
 
 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the personal conduct concerns. 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust, there is 
a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of eligibility for such position. 
Unmitigated concerns about Applicant’s cohabitation with an illegal alien and her 
disregard for U.S. law leads me to conclude that grant of eligibility for a position of 
public trust to Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
security interest of the United States to grant eligibility for a position of public trust to 
Applicant. Eligibility for a position of public trust is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
