1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01687 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, Applicant failed to mitigate drug involvement 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 26, 2015, to obtain a security clearance required for a position with a 
defense contractor. (Item 3) The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On September 6, 2016, DOD 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for drug 
involvement (Guideline H). (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2 
 
2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions 
issued after that date.1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 26, 2016, admitting the allegation of 
marijuana use from June 1983 until January 2015. Applicant elected to have the matter 
decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on October 19, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on November 1, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant provided additional information in response to the FORM on 
November 18, 2016. I was assigned the case on July 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 51-year-old 1983 high school graduate. He served on active duty in the 
Marine Corps from August 1983 until March 1989 when he received an honorable 
discharge. He spent 32 years working in the construction trades. He has been 
employed in a shipyard working on submarine construction since May 2015. He married 
in September 1996 and has one child. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated May 26, 2015) 
 
The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, in response to question 23 of the e-QIP, 
that he used marijuana three times a week from June 1983 until January 2015. (SOR 
1.a) Applicant also wrote to a security adjudicator that he no longer used drugs or 
alcohol, and has eight years of sobriety and two years of not using marijuana. He 
reported in his letter to the security adjudicator that he is clean, sober, and of right mind 
thanks to the help of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA); that he is proud of his service as a 
Marine; that he is reliable and trustworthy in his job in the shipyard; that his career in the 
shipyard started him on a new life; and that he is sincere and honest and will submit to 
drug testing at any time. (Item 2, Letter, dated September 20, 2016) 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant noted that he did not use marijuana 
during his Marine Corps service. In his answer to the SOR and on his e-QIP, he 
admitted using marijuana during the time he was an active duty Marine. During the 
years he used marijuana, he stated he did not use the illegal drug constantly. This is a 
distinction without a difference, and I conclude that Applicant used marijuana while on 
active duty with the Marine Corps. He is now sober and drug-free and intends to remain 
that way. He notes as a positive to remain drug free that he is the father of a 12-year-old 
girl. However, since she was born in 2004, he used marijuana for the first nine years of 
her life. He stated that his recovery has taken time but he built a solid foundation. He 
spends his spare time enjoying a clean and sober lifestyle and helping those struggling 
with drug and alcohol addiction. (Item 5) 
 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs. 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decision shall be “in terms of eh national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1 (b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified and sensitive information). 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The illegal use of a controlled substance to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or 
mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 
U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. (AG ¶ 24) 
 
Applicant admits that he used marijuana three times a week from June 1983 until 
January 2015. Marijuana is a controlled substance. These facts raise the following Drug 
Involvement Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 25: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; and  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.  
 
 I considered the following Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problems, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any further involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
5 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant admits to using marijuana three 
times weekly for over 32 years from June 1983 until January 2015. He reports that he 
stopped using marijuana in January 2015, just 32 months ago. This timing makes his 
misuse frequent, recent, and deliberate. Other than his statement that he has ceased 
using marijuana, there are no other indications that he stopped using illegal drugs. He 
did not present any evidence that would bolster or corroborate his non-use of marijuana. 
There is no evidence of counseling, rehabilitation, or ongoing after care programs. Even 
if he has stopped, he could easily use marijuana again since he misused the illegal 
substance for over 32 years and only reported stopping in the last few years. His 
misuse could start at any time. Applicant has not provided sufficient information for me 
to be convinced that he has stopped misusing marijuana. 
 
 Applicant stated an intent not to misuse controlled substances again, but he did 
not execute an agreement to that effect. The only evidence of his intent is his statement. 
There is some evidence that he participated in AA and may have received counseling 
about drug abuse. There is no evidence of the extent of his participating in and the 
results of drug treatment and counseling programs. There are no evaluations from 
counselors as to his prognosis for not using illegal drugs in the future. Since Applicant 
provided no documentation to verify that he no longer uses illegal drugs; that he 
successfully completed a drug abuse treatment program; and that his statement of 
intent not to use illegal drugs in the future is reliable, Applicant has failed to mitigate 
drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
6 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s six years of 
active and reserve service as a Marine. Applicant admitted substance misuse from June 
1983 until June 2015. He presented minimal evidence of counseling and rehabilitation. 
Overall, these facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated drug 
involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
TH0MAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
