1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00276 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I find that Applicant 
failed to mitigate drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on December 20, 2013, to retain a security clearance required for his duties with a 
defense contractor. A security investigator from the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) interviewed Applicant on February 21, 2014. (PSI) On June 8, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns for drug involvement (Guideline H) and personal conduct 
(Guideline E) for the same drug related involvement. The actions were taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense 
on September 1, 2006.  
2 
 
 Applicant provided a detailed answer to the SOR on June 23, 2016. He admitted 
the allegations of marijuana and ecstasy use, but denied that under the circumstances 
his conduct showed dishonesty, unreliability, untrustworthiness, unwillingness to follow 
rules or regulations, lack of good judgment, or lack of candor. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on August 24, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on 
December 2, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 5, 2017, scheduling a hearing for April 24, 2017. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits, which I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4. 
Applicant testified, and offered a series of military and civilian performance appraisals 
and awards which I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant 
Exhibits (AX) A and B. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 2, 
2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions are included in my findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He received two bachelor degrees in 1984, and a juris 
doctor degree in 1991. He is married but has no children. Applicant served for over 23 
years in the United States Marine Corps; five years as a judge advocate on active duty 
from January 1989 until August 1994, and as a judge advocate in the Marine Corps 
Selected Reserve from August 1994 until August 2012, when he retired as a lieutenant 
colonel (O-5) and received an honorable discharge. 
 
 Applicant received numerous awards and decorations during his active and 
reserve service. He received an Army Commendation Medal and a Humanitarian 
Service Medal for service during Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, He received a Navy 
Marine Corps Commendation Medal, Meritorious Unit Commendation Medal, Global 
War on Terrorism Medal, a National Defense Service Medal twice, and a Selected 
Marine Corps Reserve Medal. He also provided five letters of appreciation he received 
for his service as a Marine. His fitness reports show that Applicant was a supremely 
talented professional Marine who was sought by commanders for service in their units. 
                                                          
1 I considered Applicant’s case under both the September 1, 2006 AGs, and the June 8, 2017 AGs. My 
decision would be the same under both AGs. 
3 
 
The reports also show that he is a person who follows rules and regulations. He has not 
been the subject of any military disciplinary action or investigations. His conduct shows 
that he is a person that follows rules and directives. (Tr. 19-24; GX 1, e-QIP, dated 
December 20, 2013; AX A, Fitness Reports and awards and decorations) 
 
 Applicant, since he left active duty in 1994, has been employed as a civilian high-
level executive for various government contractors in communications and cyber 
security. He is presently, and has been since May 2007, a director in the federal 
practice section of a large consulting firm and government contractor. His civilian 
performance awards from his various employers are similar to his military performance 
assessment. The reports show that he is considered a subject matter expert on data 
protection. He has consulted on cyber risk and how to secure mass data sets. His 
performance evaluations are considered superior. (Tr. 24-30; AX B, Civilian 
performance evaluations) 
 
 Applicant was granted eligibility for access to classified information when he was 
commissioned in the Marine Corps in 1989. Applicant admits that all officers in the 
Marine Corps Selected Reserve are granted eligibility for access to classified 
information while they are in the Selected Reserve. The clearance follows the officer the 
entire period they are in the Marine Corps Selected Reserve. It should also be noted 
that his clearance was periodically updated, and his eligibility was continued while he 
was in the Marine Corps Selected Reserve status. His clearance as a civilian at the 
consulting firm flows from the clearance granted to him when he entered active duty and 
while serving in the Marine Corps Selective Reserve. In 2008, he was administered a 
polygraph examination by a government agency so he could receive a higher-level 
security clearance for the work he was doing for his civilian employer. At first, he was 
not granted a clearance to have access to high-level information. After appealing, he 
was granted eligibility for the clearance he and his firm sought for him. He still has that 
high-level clearance with the civilian employer.2 (Tr. 32-37; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated 
December 20, 2013; GX 2, PSI, dated February 21, 2014) 
 
The SOR alleges the use of controlled substances on three different occasions 
that violate both drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. The first 
allegation concerns the use of marijuana in September 2013. The second allegation 
concerns the use of ecstasy in June 2006. The third allegations concerns the use of 
marijuana on a few occasions up until 2001. The three allegations also included a 
statement that Applicant had been granted access to classified information at the time 
he allegedly used a controlled substance. Applicant acknowledged that he was granted 
eligibility for access to classified information in 1989, his eligibility was renewed in 2003, 
and he received a higher-level clearance as well as an SCI clearance in 2009. Applicant 
reported on his e-QIP that he used ecstasy two times over two days in 2008, and 
                                                          
2 The Defense Security Service website in response to frequently asked questions notes that a personnel 
security clearance remains in effect as long as the individual remains continuously employed by the 
cleared contractor and can reasonably be exppected to require access to classified information. (See 
Department of Defense (DOD) Defense Security Service, Frequently asked Questions about the 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Process, http://www.dss.mil/psmo-i/ps_ faqs.html#8.) 
4 
 
marijuana twice for his birthday in September 2013. In his detailed response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted his marijuana use in September 2013, his ecstasy use in June 
2006, but denied the marijuana use up until 2001.  
 
 SOR allegation 1.a and 2.a concern the use of marijuana twice for his birthday in 
September 2013. Applicant admitted he and his partner were on vacation in 
Amsterdam. His partner purchased some marijuana for them, gave it to Applicant to use 
in celebration of his fiftieth birthday. Marijuana purchase and use is legal in Amsterdam. 
Applicant took a few puffs of a marijuana cigarette on two occasions for his birthday. 
Applicant has not used marijuana or any other controlled substance since the use in 
September 2013. He is still with his partner who has not used marijuana since 
December 2016. Applicant stated his intent not to use any controlled substance in the 
future. (Tr. 55-58) 
 
 Applicant did not believe that he had an active clearance at the time. He had not 
worked in a classified environment or been employed on a classified contract or project 
in some time. He was not “read in” on any classified work or engagements. He was not 
thinking of classified work at the time he used marijuana in September 2013. He has a 
reputation within his company of being the person that follows all of the rules. At the 
time he used marijuana, he was not thinking about the rules pertaining to security 
clearances. (Tr. 19-22) 
 
SOR allegations 1.b and 2.b concern the use of ecstasy. Applicant admits that he 
used ecstasy in June 2006, over ten years ago. At the time, he was experiencing a 
significant personal emotional event from the break-up of an over five-year relationship. 
He thought the relationship would last a lifetime. A friend gave him the ecstasy which he 
consumed at that time. He admits that his actions were wrong and he regrets using the 
controlled substance. He was not thinking about the status of his access to classified 
information at the time. (Tr.19-22) 
 
SOR allegations 1.c and 2.c concern the use of marijuana on a few occasions 
until 2001 despite being granted a security clearance. Since the allegation is in the 
nature of Applicant having a security clearance, it can only concern the use of marijuana 
after 1989 when Applicant was granted eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant denies this allegation. The government’s evidence of the allegation is in an 
adjudication report that reads in part: “Between December 1979 and June 2001, 
SUBJECT used marijuana about five times and in June 2006, he used ecstasy about 
two times.” Applicant stated that before entering active duty in the Marine Corps while a 
high school and college student, he experimented a few times with marijuana. Applicant 
was either on active duty or in the Marine Corps Selected Reserve from 1989 until 
2012. He never used marijuana while a Marine. He used ecstasy in June 2006 while in 
the Marine Corps Selected Reserve. The government’s information can only refer to 
Applicant’s potential experimental use of marijuana before entering the Marine Corps. I 
find, based on the available evidence, that the Government has not met its burden to 
establish that Applicant used marijuana from 1979 to 2001 creating a security concern 
because he had been granted a security clearance.  
5 
 
In his answer to the SOR and in his testimony at the hearing, Applicant stated 
that when he used marijuana in 2013 and ecstasy in 2006 he was under a 
misunderstanding as to the status of his security clearance. He did not know that his 
security clearance was still active since he had not read or seen classified information in 
some time. He also pointed out that under the whole-person concept he has a history of 
reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to follow rules and regulations. These 
characteristics are reflected in his service of over 23 years as a Marine Corps lieutenant 
colonel judge advocate, as a high-level civilian contractor and executive, the lack of any 
disciplinary or criminal action against him, the lack of any counseling for work 
attendance or performance, and the letters of appreciation and accolades he received 
for his military and civilian work. There are no indications of any mental health or 
financial issues raised.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
6 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription and 
non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or mental 
impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Controlled substance means any controlled substance as defined in 21 
U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behavior listed above. Marijuana or cannabis and ecstasy are controlled 
substances. (AG ¶ 24)  
 
Applicant admitted using marijuana twice in September 2013 and ecstasy twice 
in June 2006. He was granted eligibility for access to classified information in 1989. 
Applicant was never tested for drug use, or been seen by a physician, counselor, or 
medical professional concerning drug use, and he never entered a drug treatment 
programs. Under normal drug use circumstances, an Applicant has to possess a drug to 
use it. Since Applicant was given the controlled substances by friends and immediately 
consumed the controlled substances, he never possessed the controlled substances. 
The facts raise the following Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 25: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
 I considered the following Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
7 
 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 and 
 
 (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
 involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
 involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
 eligibility. 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation. 
 
 The mitigating condition must be considered as they apply to Applicant and 
under the circumstances of this case. It is incomprehensible to believe that Applicant did 
not know that he was eligible for access to classified information when he used ecstasy 
in 2006 and marijuana in 2013. Applicant is a highly sophisticated person and not your 
average Applicant for a security clearance. He is a lawyer, a Marine judge advocate 
lieutenant colonel, and a high-level civilian executive for a government contractor 
working in cyber security and data base protection. The mitigating conditions must be 
considered under the circumstances of his case to determine reliability, trustworthiness, 
and the ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. I find that 
Applicant knew his security clearance was active when he used the controlled 
substances in 2006 and 2013.  
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana was recent, only about four years ago. Applicant’s 
use was voluntary and not under unusual circumstances. The marijuana use was to 
celebrate his birthday and in a place where marijuana use was legal. These 
circumstances are not unusual and can easily happen again. While Applicant did not 
provide a written statement of his intent not to use drugs again, he was sincere in his 
verbal statement of intent not to use drugs again. His use of ecstasy was over two days 
more than ten years ago. His use was voluntary and again not under unusual 
circumstances even though it took place after a significant emotional event. Under these 
circumstances, there has not been an appropriate period of abstinence. Applicant has 
not established sufficient evidence that could indicate a change in lifestyle and 
circumstance.  
 
 
8 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified and sensitive 
information. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks 
whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  
 Applicant’s use of marijuana in September 2013 and ecstasy in June 2006 was 
also raised as a personal conduct security concern. Personal conduct security concerns 
were also raised concerning the use of marijuana until 2001 while being granted a 
security clearance. I found that the government failed to present sufficient evidence to 
establish this use so no further discussion as personal conduct is required. The 
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(c) applies to the use of marijuana in September 2013 
and ecstasy in June 2006: (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information).  
 I consider the following mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior  or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contribute to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such  behavior is unlikely 
to recur;  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity was unwitting, has 
ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 These mitigating conditions do not apply for the same reasons articulated under 
drug involvement. Applicant knew he had an active security clearance and he knowingly 
used controlled substances. His actions violated both his responsibilities as a security 
clearance holder, and his obligations as a Marine officer in the Selected Reserve. 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the Applicant’s service 
on active duty and in the Selected Reserve as a judge advocate for the Marine Corps, 
his awards and decorations, his fitness reports and the letters of appreciation and 
recommendation. I considered that for over 15 years Applicant has served as a high-
level civilian contactor at a prestigious consulting firm and is an expert in data base 
protection. His civilian evaluations are also excellent. I considered Applicant’s regret for 
using controlled substances under the circumstances and his intent not to use drugs in 
the future.  
 
 I have found that Applicant had to know that he was eligible for access to 
classified information and recall to active duty when he used controlled substances. He 
may not have thought about his clearance status at the time he used illegal drugs, but 
that does not negate the fact that he was eligible for access at the time. Applicant is a 
sophisticated, highly educated, well regarded Marine lawyer and officer, high-level 
executive, and contractor. However, he freely and knowingly used controlled 
substances while being eligible for access to classified information. Applicant’s good 
reputation and record does not override that he used controlled substances twice while 
having access to classified information. Applicant does receive consideration for having 
revealed his use of controlled substances. He was honest and forthright about his use. 
There is no way for the Government to learn of Applicant’s use under the circumstances 
if Applicant had not been honest and forthright on his security clearance application.  
 
 The allegations under Guidelines E and H, as established by the government’s 
evidence, reflect a lack of judgment by Applicant. The evidence shows a recent use of 
marijuana, and use of ecstasy while being eligible for access to classified information. 
10 
 
Applicant’s explanation for using marijuana and ecstasy while holding a security 
clearance is that he just did not think about having a security clearance under the 
circumstances. Applicant showed a lack of judgment when he used marijuana in 
Amsterdam without thinking about the fact he had eligibility for access to classified 
information. He knew that while marijuana use was legal in Amsterdam, it was not legal 
under federal law, the Uniform Code of Military Justice, or while holding a security 
clearance. He again showed a lack of judgment when he knowingly used ecstasy 
without thinking about the facts of his security clearance. Applicant’s statement of intent 
not to use controlled substances in the future has little impact because of his previous 
voluntary use of marijuana and ecstasy. 
 
Applicant admitted using marijuana and ecstasy while holding a security 
clearance. These facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment 
and his suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
