 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00281 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 31, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 4-11 (Items 1-3 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on 
September 11, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections or 
submit any documentary evidence. Items 4-11 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 In her answer, Applicant disputed ever having filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
petition as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The record contains no evidence supporting this 
allegation. My formal findings will reflect a finding in favor of Applicant on this allegation. 
Applicant also disputed the amount owed reflected in SOR ¶ 1.f ($89,200). The 
evidence supports Applicant’s claim that the amount of this debt is $892. I sua sponte 
amended SOR ¶ 1.f to reflect the amount owed as $892. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted part of the allegations and denied other allegations in her 
answer to the SOR. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. She is seeking a position with a defense contractor. 
From 2012 to 2015 she worked in the private sector. She was unemployed from July 
2011 to August 2012. From 1996 to 2011, she worked for federal contractors. She is 
married and has four children.2  
  
 The SOR alleges four bankruptcy filings and six delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $6,721. The debts are comprised of charged-off and collections accounts 
(credit cards, consumer debts, telecommunication debts, and medical debts). The 
bankruptcies and debts are supported by a credit report from July 2015, bankruptcy 
court records (with the exception of SOR ¶ 1.b), her statement to an investigator in 
October 2015, and her SOR admissions in her answer from July 2016.3 
 
 Applicant attributes her financial problems to her period of unemployment and 
her husband’s financial problems. Applicant had her debts discharged in her 2012 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. All the SOR debts were incurred after her 2012 bankruptcy. 
Applicant’s 2015 Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed on August 4, 2016, for failure to 
make payments under the approved plan. Applicant claimed she was making monthly 
                                                          
2 Items 4, 11. 
 
3 Items 2, 5-11. 
 
 
3 
 
 
payments in the amount of $1,180 to the trustee. She failed to document these 
payments. Applicant filed another Chapter 13 petition on August 24, 2016, but that 
petition was pending a motion to dismiss for failure to file required documentation. No 
further updated information on the status of this Chapter 13 is contained in the record. 
Applicant provided no proof of payment for any of the listed debts. Applicant’s debts 
remain unresolved.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
4 Items 5-11. 
 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unpaid or unresolved. She had debts 
discharged through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012 and filed two Chapter 13 
bankruptcies in 2011 and 2015 that were dismissed.5 I find the above disqualifying 
conditions are raised.  
 
                                                          
5 The August 2016 Chapter 13 was not alleged in the SOR. It will not be used for disqualification 
purposes, but I will consider it as it may relate to the application of mitigating conditions and the whole-
person factors. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant presented some evidence that the debts were due to 
circumstances beyond her control (unemployment and husband’s financial problems). 
She did not show that she took responsible action to attempt to resolve her debts. I find 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant’s only efforts to resolve her debts was to use the 
bankruptcy process. She was unsuccessful at that though when her 2015 Chapter 13 
was dismissed for failure to make plan payments. She failed to provide documentation 
showing any efforts to contact the creditors, set up payment plans, or make payments 
on the listed debts. She obtained financial counseling through the bankruptcy process 
from a legitimate and credible source. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply. Applicant 
successfully disputed the Chapter 11 bankruptcy alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies to that allegation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s period of 
unemployment and her husband’s financial difficulties. However, I also considered that 
Applicant filed four bankruptcy actions since 2012, receiving a discharge of debts one 
time, and having her case dismissed twice for failure to make plan payments. She also 
failed to present documentation addressing her other listed debt. Applicant has not 
established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph   1.a:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.b:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c–1.j:    Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
