 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-00618 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline. Applicant answered the SOR and requested 
a hearing (Answer).1 
 
 On April 12, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into 
the administrative record.2 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on April 20, 2017, 
and the record closed on May 5, 2017. 
                                                          
1 The SOR was amended to correct the spelling of Applicant’s name. 
 
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 4; Applicant’s Exhibits A – D. Applicant’s relevancy objection to Exhibit 4 was 
overruled, but considered in assessing the weight to give the exhibit. Correspondence, the notice of hearing, 
and case management order are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I – III. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, 34, enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps shortly after September 11, 2001. 
He served in the military from 2002 to 2009, deploying once to a foreign country for 10 
months in support of the Global War on Terror. He held a security clearance while in the 
military and received an honorable discharge.  
 
Applicant married a then-foreign national in 2007. With the benefit of hindsight, 
Applicant now recognizes that he was reckless with his spending during their relatively 
short-lived (eight-year) marriage. He bought his ex-wife a car, but when she lost her job 
in 2009, he was unable to make the monthly payments on the car and pay the other 
household expenses on his income alone. The car was repossessed and, after it was 
sold at auction, a deficiency balance of approximately $7,000 remained. Applicant also 
used a credit card to purchase corrective eye surgery (LASIK) for his ex-wife. When he 
became unemployed in about May 2011, Applicant was unable to make the minimum 
monthly payments on the credit card and his other debts. The credit card debt for medical 
services totaling nearly $6,000 and the $7,000 deficiency balance for the repossessed 
car are the debts referenced in SOR 1.a and 1.d, and remain unresolved.  
 
From approximately May to November 2011, Applicant was unemployed. He was 
then only able to get low-paying, short-term temporary contract work for the next 18 
months before again finding himself unemployed from May to September 2013. He and 
his ex-wife moved in with her family to save on living expenses. They separated and 
eventually divorced in May 2015.  
 
A month after the divorce, in June 2016, Applicant was hired by his current 
employer. He had been working for the company for about six months as a temporary 
contract employee before being hired as a permanent employee. He submitted a security 
clearance application in connection with his job. He self-reported his major delinquent 
debt, notably, the credit card debt (SOR 1.a) and the deficiency balance for the 
repossessed car (SOR 1.d). During a follow-on interview, Applicant discussed his debts 
and overall financial situation with a security clearance investigator. 
 
In 2015, Applicant decided to take control of his finances. He obtained financial 
counseling through his credit union in conjunction with receiving a debt consolidation loan. 
He provided documentation from the credit union showing that he repaid the nearly 
$5,000 debt consolidation loan through 16 monthly payments. (Exhibit D) He was unable 
to include the debts listed in SOR 1.a and 1.d in his debt consolidation plan with the credit 
union because of their high outstanding balances.  
 
In 2016, Applicant obtained additional financial counseling through a well-known 
and respected private credit counseling source. He submitted documentation showing 
that he paid additional debts outside the debt consolidation program. One of these debts 
was the $1,400 debt referenced in SOR 1.e. (Exhibit A) This was one of the many marital 
debts that Applicant addressed and resolved after becoming gainfully employed.  
                                                          
3 The information herein is generally extracted from Applicant’s security clearance application (Exhibit 1), 
security clearance interview (Exhibit 2), Tr. 7, 19-37, and the cited portions of the record. 
 
3 
 
Applicant also addressed his student loans, which became delinquent when he 
was unemployed. A recent student loan statement reflects a $0 past-due balance. (Exhibit 
C) Applicant is now eligible for his company’s tuition reimbursement program, which, 
together with the benefits he receives through the G.I. Bill, will allow him to satisfy his 
student loan debt. He attended college at night while working full time. As of the hearing, 
he was on track to earn his associate’s degree in industrial engineering in Spring 2017. 
 
Applicant earns a yearly salary of approximately $36,000. He has addressed and 
resolved all his past-due debts, except for the debts listed in SOR 1.a and 1.d. His credit 
score has increased to 625, which is generally considered fair. (Exhibit B) 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).4  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14.5 Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses 
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). 
 
5 See also ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017) (favorable decision reversed because 
Department Counsel failed to present evidence to substantiate allegation that was denied by applicant); 
ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (rejecting Department Counsel’s argument that an 
adverse decision can be based solely on non-alleged conduct). 
 
4 
 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant married at a relatively young age and made imprudent financial decisions 
while married. He took concrete action to put his financial house in order starting in 2015. 
He obtained financial counseling, repaid a number of the debts that had become 
delinquent when he was unemployed and underemployed from 2011 to 2013, and 
responsibly addressed his student loans. However, his past negative financial history and 
inability to pay the debts listed in SOR 1.a and 1.d raise the Guideline F security concern, 
which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
 
5 
 
financial issues cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities that 
are essential to protecting classified information.6  
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the Guideline F disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were, in part, due to his attempt to lavish his former 
wife with gifts that he could not afford. He turned to credit cards and loans to pay for the 
gifts. When he became unemployed, he was unable to pay the debts and his financial 
situation spiraled out of control until he secured full-time employment about two years 
ago and started taking action to reign in his finances.  
 
A security clearance adjudication is not meant to serve as a means to punish an 
applicant for past poor financial decisions. Furthermore, persons applying for a security 
clearance are not required to be debt free, nor are they required to resolve all past-due 
debts simultaneously or even resolve the delinquent debts listed on the SOR first. Instead, 
they are expected to present documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security 
concerns raised by their financial circumstances, to include the accumulation of 
delinquent debt. They also bear the burden of showing that they manage their present 
finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified information.7 
 
 Here, Applicant demonstrated that his past financial problems do not cast doubt 
on his current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to handle and safeguard 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012). 
 
7 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
classified information. Even before getting hired by his current employer as a permanent 
employee in June 2016, Applicant obtained financial counseling and started taking the 
necessary steps to address and resolve his debts. Of note, he repaid a number of his 
debts through a debt consolidation plan, satisfied other debts outside the plan, and 
addressed his student loans ($0 past-due balance). He has not incurred other delinquent 
debt since being hired by his employer.  
 
In short, Applicant demonstrated that he currently handles his personal financial 
obligations in a responsible manner and, though his financial situation may not be perfect, 
his finances no longer raise a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s present eligibility for a security clearance.8  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 Specifically, I find that the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply and, together 
with the other favorable record evidence (post-9/11 military service), mitigate the Guideline F concerns. 
