1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 16-00061 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concern stemming from her contacts and interests with Russia. 
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that her 
circumstances raised security concerns under Adjudicative Guideline C for foreign 
preference and Guideline B for foreign influence.1 Applicant answered the SOR on July 
5, 2016, and requested a hearing to establish her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
 On June 29, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at the hearing, and the exhibits offered by the Government at the 
hearing were admitted into the administrative record without objection. (Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2; Applicant did not offer any exhibits.) The transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) was received on July 10, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4) establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position.”2 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “new 
adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance cases decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.3 In light of 
this explicit direction (and absent lawful authority to the contrary), I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security 
clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).4 DOD CAF 
adjudicators reviewed this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, 
dated September 1, 2006, which were then in effect. My decision and formal Findings 
under the revised Guideline B would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines. 
 
 The SOR alleged a foreign preference under Guideline C. At the outset of the 
hearing, Department Counsel withdrew that allegation.5  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
            The SOR alleged under Guideline B that (1) Applicant’s mother and father are 
citizens and residents of Russia, (2) Applicant maintains contacts with friends who are 
citizens and residents of Russia, and (3) Applicant jointly owns real property in Russia 
worth about $80,000. Applicant admitted the first two allegations and admitted, with 
qualifications discussed below, the third allegation.   
  
Applicant is 38 years old and was born in Russia. She came to the United States 
in December 2002 and was naturalized in October 2009. She earned her bachelor’s 
degree from a Russian university in 2000 and has taken post-graduate courses from three 
United States universities in 2007. She married her first spouse, a U. S. citizen, in 2003 
but divorced him in 2006.  She married her current spouse, also a U. S. citizen, in 2007. 
                                                          
2 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
3 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
4 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated: “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and 
agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
5 Tr. 11-12.  
 
3 
 
She has two adult stepsons (ages 34 and 38) by her current spouse. All of her in-laws 
live in the United States.6 
 
She has worked for a defense contractor since 2006. In that employment, she was 
assigned to support her immediate supervisor, a high level corporate executive involved 
in intelligence analysis. Because of Applicant’s Russian language skills and having been 
born in Russia, her immediate supervisor and facility security officer asked her to apply 
for a clearance, so she could better support the mission.7 
 
Applicant and her spouse have lived at their principal residence, which they own 
outright, since May 2005. She estimates the value of that home to be about $650,000. 
She and her spouse also own outright a rental property worth about $110,000. Applicant 
has a retirement account worth about $40,000 and a savings account with a balance of 
about $300,000. Applicant’s net worth is about $1.1 million. In her answer to the SOR and 
at the hearing, Applicant explained that her name is on the deed of real property in Russia 
that is her parents’ principal residence. She does not consider herself to be a co-owner. 
As an only child, her name was put on the deed so that when her parents pass, the 
property will go to Applicant instead of reverting to the Russian government. That property 
is paid for and is worth about $80,000. She has no other property interests or assets in 
Russia.8 
 
Applicant’s mother is 62, and her father is 64.  Both are retired and receive a 
government pension. At one time Applicant’s mother worked in a military factory, but she 
left that job almost 20 years ago. Other than receiving pension benefits, neither of her 
parents have any affiliation with the Russian government. Applicant speaks with her 
parents by telephone about once a week. Applicant maintains limited contacts via social 
media with friends from her college days in Russia. None of those friends have any 
affiliation to the Russian government. She has not been to Russia in four years. 
Applicant’s parents have long-term travel visas, and they have traveled to the United 
States to visit her.9  
 
Administrative Notice (Russia) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I have 
taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about Russia:10 
 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 1; Tr. 16, 20-23. Because they are close to Applicant’s age, her step-sons are “more like 
brothers.” Tr. 23.   
 
7 Tr. 16, 22.  
 
8 Tr. 18-19, 23-25, 29-33. 
 
9 Answer; Exhibit 1; Tr. 17, 25-29, 31.  
 
10 Exhibit 2.   
4 
 
  Russia continues is one of the leading state intelligence threats to U.S. interests. 
Russian intelligence services continue to target U.S. and allied personnel with access to 
sensitive computer network information. Russia is one of the top two most aggressive 
and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. economic information and technologies, 
particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection methods include targeting of U.S. 
visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as having access to sensitive 
information. One of the two trends that may increase Russia’s threat over the next several 
years is that many Russian immigrants with advanced technical skills, who work for 
leading U.S. companies, may be increasingly targeted for recruitment by Russian 
intelligence services.  
 
 Russia’s extensive and sophisticated intelligence operations are motivated by 
Russia’s high dependence on natural resources, the need to diversity its economy, and 
the belief that the global-economic system is tilted toward the United States at Russia’s 
expense. As a result, Russia’s highly capable intelligence services are using human 
intelligence, cyber, and other operations to collect economic information and technology 
to support Russia’s economic development and security. In June 2010, the U.S. 
Department of Justice announced the arrests of ten alleged secret agents for carrying out 
long-term, “deep-cover” assignments on behalf of Russia. Within weeks, all ten 
defendants pleaded guilty in federal court, and were immediately expelled from the United 
States.  
 
 Russia continues to take information warfare to a new level, working to fan anti-
U.S. and anti-Western sentiment both within Russia and globally. Moscow will continue 
to publish false and misleading information in an effort to discredit the West, construe or 
distort events that threaten Russia’s image, undercut consensus on Russia, and defend 
Russia’s role as a responsible and indispensable global power. 
 
 The most significant human-rights problems in Russia involves the following: 
restrictions on the ability to choose one’s government and freedoms of expression, 
assembly, association, and the media, as well as internet freedoms; political prosecutions 
and administration of justice; and government discrimination against racial, ethnic, 
religious, and sexual minorities. Other problems include allegations of torture and 
excessive force by law enforcement officials that sometimes led to deaths, executive 
branch pressure on the judiciary, electoral irregularities, and extensive official corruption. 
The government failed to take adequate steps to prosecute or punish most officials who 
committed abuses, resulting in a climate of impunity. 
 
 Although Russian law prohibits officials from entering a private residence, except 
in cases prescribed by federal law or when authorized by a judicial decision, government 
officials enter residences and premises without warrants. In addition, while Russian law 
prohibits government monitoring of correspondence, telephone conversations, and other 
means of communication without a warrant, government officials engage in electronic 
surveillance without appropriate authorization. 
 
5 
 
 Russia is considered to be at a high risk of local, regional, and international 
terrorism threats and concerns. In September 2015, Russia initiated military operations 
in Syria. In response, the Islamic Group of Iraq and the Levant and affiliated terrorist 
organizations have issued threats vowing retaliatory terrorist attacks in Russia. The 
Russian Federal Security Service reported no terrorist attacks in the Russian Federation 
in 2015; in October 2015, however, a Russian charter plane exploded in mid-air over 
Egypt due to an improvised explosive device on board. All 224 people on board, including 
219 Russian nationals, were killed. Russian authorities, in addition to the United States 
and the United Kingdom, determined the incident was an act of terrorism. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
6 
 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. 
interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign 
interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider the country 
in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect classified 
or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information or technology; and,  
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the individual 
to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal conflict of 
interest. 
 
The guideline also notes several conditions in AG ¶ 8 that could mitigate security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the United States; 
7 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation; 
and,  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property      
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human- rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country 
is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the 
nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not 
consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. Because Applicant’s parents are citizens and 
residents of Russia, AG ¶ 7(a) applies. Her relationship with her parents makes AG ¶ 
7(b) applicable, as well. Being on the deed to her parents’ home triggers AG ¶ 7 (f). 
Applicant’s contacts with her friends in Russia triggers AG ¶ 7(b). The next inquiry is 
whether any mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Applicant has lived and worked in this country for 15 years and has been a citizen 
since 2009. Although Applicant speaks with her parents by telephone weekly, she has 
not visited her parents in Russia in four years. In fact, they travel to the United States to 
visit her. Her parents are both retired and have no affiliation with the Russian government. 
Although at one time her mother worked for a military factory, that was almost 20 years 
ago. Her parents’ only connection to the Russian government is that they receive 
government pension payments. Applicant is married to a U. S. citizen; because they are 
close to her age, Applicant’s two step-sons are like brothers to her. All of her in-laws live 
in the United States. Applicant has substantial financial holdings in this country worth 
over a $1 million. She is on the deed to her parent’s $80,000 Russian home as an estate-
planning matter. She has no other assets in Russia. As an only child, Applicant will inherit 
8 
 
her parents’ home only when both parents are deceased. She has worked for a defense 
contractor since 2006, and because of Applicant’s Russian background, her employer 
urged her to apply for a security clearance in order to better support her employer’s 
mission.  
 
           In sum, Applicant has her family, professional, and financial roots firmly planted in 
the United States. I find that security concerns raised by her relationship with her parents 
are mitigated under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b). I find that the security concern raised under AG ¶ 
7(f) by virtue of being on the deed to her parents’ home is mitigated under AG ¶ 8(f). I find 
that Applicant’s communications with friends in Russia via social media are so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood they could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) applies.   
 
The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.11 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      Withdrawn 
 
      Subparagraph 1.a:          Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)           For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 2.a-d:                                           For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
9 
 
 
