 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03219 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2016, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned me on January 30, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 27, 2017, and the hearing was 
held as scheduled on March 15, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 23, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the Guideline G allegations in the SOR, but 
failed to either admit or deny the Guideline J allegations. Since the underlying 
allegations are the same under both Guidelines, he is deemed to have admitted them 
all. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is married for the second time and has two children 
from his first marriage and two stepchildren from his second. He has worked for a 
defense contractor since December 2013. He retired from the Air Force after 21 years 
of service as a technical sergeant (E-6) in September 2013. During his military career, 
he deployed to Afghanistan. He has an associate’s degree and is pursuing his 
bachelor’s degree.2   
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was charged with driving under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI) on four occasions: January 1998; January 2006; October 2012; and April 
2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d). This conduct was also alleged as criminal conduct under 
Guideline J in the SOR. (SOR ¶ 2.a)  
  
 Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was about 18 years old. Early in his 
military career, he would drink a six-pack of beer three times a month. His consumption 
rate has remained about the same. He becomes intoxicated about once a month. He 
was 24 years old at the time of his first DUI in 1998. He found out his wife was pregnant 
with someone else’s child. He admitted to this offense. He was required to attend 
alcohol and drug abuse prevention and treatment (ADAPT) after this first DUI. In 2006, 
he was arrested for his second DUI. He was drinking on this occasion because he was 
going through a divorce. The DUI was ultimately reduced to a reckless driving as a 
result of a plea bargain. The Air Force again required his participation in ADAPT. In 
October 2012, Applicant was at a bar where he drank approximately six beers and two 
to three “shots” of alcohol. He later left to drive home. On his way home he was stopped 
by local law enforcement for an improper lane change. He admitted to the officer that he 
had been drinking, but refused to take the field sobriety tests and a breath test. He was 
arrested by local law enforcement, but later jurisdiction was given to the military. 
Applicant accepted nonjudicial punishment from his commander (UCMJ, Article 15). He 
was reduced in rank from E-7 to E-6 and lost one month’s pay. He was also required to 
                                                          
2 Tr. 5, 21-22, 24; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
attend ADAPT. In April 2015, Applicant was out boating with friends where he drank 
approximately seven to eight beers. He then went home. He was later contacted by his 
friends and met them at a local bar. He drank about three more beers there then drove 
home. On the way, he was stopped by law enforcement for speeding. He admitted he 
had been drinking, but refused all roadside tests. He was arrested for DUI. He later 
pleaded guilty and was placed on one year’s probation, fined, was required to attend 
DUI school, and was required to have an interlock installed on his car. He completed 
the terms of his probation in July 2016.3  
  
 Applicant continues to drink alcohol and become intoxicated. The last time he 
was intoxicated was Christmas 2016. He does not believe he has an alcohol problem. 
There was no evidence presented concerning a formal alcohol diagnosis. Although 
Applicant stated he went to alcohol treatment programs or attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) after each incident, there is no documentation in the record of these 
programs.4 
 
 Applicant presented 17 reference letters from current and former colleagues and 
supervisors. They describe Applicant as an excellent employee and someone who 
possesses integrity, honesty, and high character. His friends describe him as 
dependable, loyal, and trustworthy. They feel Applicant has learned from his mistakes 
and will not find himself in that position in the future. They recommend continuation of 
his security clearance.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 25-28, 30, 33; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 28-29, 37. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
   
 Applicant’s four DUI arrests or charges support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s last adverse alcohol incident occurred in April 2015. His alcohol-
related incidents have not been infrequent having been arrested or charged four times 
since 1998. He continues to consume alcohol to the point of intoxication, and therefore I 
cannot conclude that an alcohol-related incident will not recur in the future. His actions 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant denies that he has an alcohol problem. He continues to consume 
alcohol to the point of intoxication, despite his past history. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant claims participation in alcohol treatment programs after each DUI 
incident, although there is no documentation of these programs and no details of what 
this program entailed. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
 
6 
 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
Applicant’s four DUIs constitute a pattern of criminal conduct. I find that both 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s last criminal incident occurred in April 2015. His criminal acts have 
not been infrequent having been arrested or charged four times since 1998. He 
continues to consume alcohol and therefore I cannot conclude that additional crimes will 
not recur in the future. He was given at least three opportunities to change his behavior 
after attending ADAPT courses, yet he failed to do so. His repeated criminal behavior 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, and it also 
shows a lack of successful rehabilitation, despite his successful completion of his 
probation. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service, his letters of recommendation, and his personal circumstances. However, I also 
considered that he has not come to grips with his alcohol issues. He continues to 
consume alcohol even though it has resulted in four different criminal actions against 
him. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines G and J. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
