 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00344 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) effective with the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Agent Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, which revised and replaced the 2006 AGs 
and became effective for all decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I 
have applied the newly promulgated AGs to this decision.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under either version. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on October 20, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on October 25, 2016, and 
had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided a 
response to the FORM comprised of a three-page affidavit signed November 22, 2016, 
and attached correspondence with a bank including a settlement agreement and a 
November 22, 2016 credit bureau report. These attachments are marked as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A and B respectively, and admitted into evidence. The Government’s 
evidence, identified as Items 1 through 6, is admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is 39-years old. She graduated from law school in 2007. Applicant has 
been employed as a deputy program manager by a federal contractor since August 
2007. She reports no military service, and she had a previous security clearance since 
2008. Applicant married in 2008, separated in 2011, and divorced in 2013. She has an 
eight year-old son. She was unemployed from August 2004 to August 2007, while she 
was in law school and studying for the bar exam. Applicant disclosed a charged-off 
loan, in the amount of $19,804, in section 26 of her Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions, Form SF-86, also known as a security clearance application (SCA) that she 
signed on August 11, 2015.3  
 
Applicant stated in her SCA that this loan (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) was consolidated 
and became delinquent when she separated from her husband in 2011 and tried to 
establish a new household for her and her son. She divorced her ex-husband in 2013 
mainly because he could not hold a job. Her credit reports reflect that the loan in SOR ¶ 
1.a ($11,274) was initially opened in August 2005 and the loan in SOR ¶ 1.b ($8,694) 
was initially opened in May 2006. At some point she consolidated these two loans for 
re-payments of $51 per month and she made some payments pursuant to the plan. 
Both loans were charged off by the bank in April 2011, and the credit report shows the 
last activity was in early 2011.4 These private loans were taken out while she attended 
law school, and she used the funds for living expenses while she studied for the bar 
exam.5 She admitted to these two delinquent bank loans, which were consolidated for 
re-payment, in her Answer to the SOR.6  
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s August 11, 2015 
SCA. (Item 4) and the summaries of her clearance interviews on October 16, 2015 and December 23, 
2015. (Item 6) 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 5. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant denied the alleged delinquency in SOR ¶ 1.c (medical debt of $1,969) 
in her Answer to the SOR. She claimed to have no knowledge of the creditor or the 
source of this debt. It has fallen off or been removed from her recent credit reports. The 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR total $21,937. In Applicant’s response to the FORM 
comprised of an affidavit she signed on November 22, 2016, she stated that she 
recently made contact with this creditor after repeated futile efforts. The creditor 
confirmed that it had no record of this debt belonging to Applicant or her ex-husband. 
Instead, it was apparently mistakenly placed on her credit report. Applicant stated in her 
affidavit that she always maintained health insurance and paid her deductibles at all 
relevant times. She contends that this could not be her medical debt. She provided no 
letter of dispute with the creditor, or correspondence from the creditor, or letter to the 
credit reporting bureaus asking that this alleged debt be removed.    
 
Applicant, in her response to the FORM, also produced documentation from the 
bank which is the creditor for the two charged-off loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.7 These 
documents show that she entered into a settlement agreement dated July 8, 2016, to 
settle both delinquent loans for a substantially discounted amount of $5,000. She also 
attached bank statements showing two debits from her account in the amount of $2,500 
each, on August 11, 2016, in compliance with the plan.8 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b are resolved.  
 
                                        Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
7 AE A.  
 
8 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to two of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. They are 
also confirmed by her credit reports. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.9  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
a clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft) and 
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                                          
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant endured a separation and divorce after law school. Arguably, these 
conditions were beyond her control. She has demonstrated that she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances, including by settling the consolidated loans from the bank. 
Applicant has made concerted efforts to resolve the delinquent medical debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. It is disappointing that a law school graduate has provided no substantiation 
for her putative recent discussions with this creditor, and no documents to dispute the 
debt, pursuant to AG ¶ 20(e). However, I am persuaded by her affidavit-response that 
this debt was mistakenly reflected on her credit report. Applicant has met his burden to 
provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are under control, and 
that her debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant’s self-disclosed, charged-off bank loans, and alleged delinquent 
medical debt, are no longer a security concern. There is sufficient evidence to conclude 
that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has met her burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:             For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
