 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00080 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Charles D. Swift, Esq., and Ashraf Nubani, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 23, 2014. On May 31, 
2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent 
him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The changes 
resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 27, 2016, 
and the case was assigned to me on March 1, 2017. On March 20, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled 
for April 26, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 9 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the 
testimony of three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 4, 2017. 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Egypt and Saudi Arabia. (GX 8; GX 9.) I took administrative notice as requested. 
On July 26, 2017, on my own motion and without objection from either party, I also took 
administrative notice of the updated information in the U.S. Department of State fact 
sheet, “U.S. Relations with Saudi Arabia,” dated February 2, 2017, and the U.S. 
Department of State travel warnings for Egypt (dated July 19, 2017) and Saudi Arabia 
(dated March 29, 2017). These documents are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits. 
I kept the record open until August 3, 2017, to enable the parties to object or comment on 
my intention to take administrative notice. Neither party objected. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
 On August 3, 2011, Applicant’s attorney notified me that Applicant’s sister-in-law 
was killed in an automobile accident on July 31, 2017. I kept the record open until August 
11, 2017, to enable him to submit documentation of the sister-in-law’s death. He timely 
submitted AX H, which was admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s brother (SOR ¶ 1.a), three sisters (SOR ¶ 1.b), 
and mother-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.c) are citizens and residents of Egypt. It also alleges that he 
maintains a bank account in Egypt (SOR ¶ 1.d) and that he has two brothers-in-law and 
sisters-in-law who are citizens of Egypt residing in Saudi Arabia (SOR ¶ 1.e). 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of 
fact.  
 
Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, stating that he had two sisters who 
are citizens and residents of Egypt and that his older sister passed away in January 2015. 
He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d, stating that the bank account was closed. He 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e, stating that he had only one brother-in-law and one 
sister-in-law residing in Saudi Arabia.  
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old self-employed sub-contractor working as a computer 
programmer for a defense contractor since March 2014. He has held public-trust positions 
but has never held a security clearance. (Tr. 6.) He applied for a security clearance in 
July 2010. His application was denied by an administrative judge in February 2013, and 
the unfavorable decision was affirmed by the Appeal Board in May 2013. (GX 6; GX 7.) 
 
 Applicant was and born and educated in Egypt. He completed college and received 
a bachelor’s degree in accounting and business administration from a university in Egypt 
in May 1985. He lived and worked in Italy from May 1985 until he came to the United 
States in June 1992. He did not visit Egypt until 1994 because he was vulnerable to being 
drafted into the Egyptian armed forces. (Tr. 62.) After 1994, he visited his family in Egypt 
about once a year. (Tr. 62-63.) He earned professional certifications from U.S. universities 
in June 2006 and August 2009. He became a U.S. citizen in August 2009. He worked as 
a database administrator for federal contractors from February 2001 to May 2008 and for 
another government agency from May 2008 to March 2010. He has worked as a self-
employed sub-contractor for federal contractors from March 2010 to the present.  
 
 Applicant married in February 1996. His wife was born in Egypt and became a U.S. 
citizen in August 2008.They have three children, ages 19, 16, and 9, who are native-born 
U.S. citizens. 
 
 Applicant’s father passed away when Applicant was in high school. His mother 
passed away in 2008, and his older sister suffered a stroke and passed away in January 
2015. His brother, two surviving sisters, and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Egypt. His brother is a lawyer but unable to work because of mental health issues. One 
of his sisters is a medical doctor; the other sister is a high school teacher. (Tr. 58-60.) His 
mother-in-law is a widow and does not work outside the home. His brother-in-law is a 
construction engineer, living and working in Saudi Arabia. His sister-in-law was a trained 
pharmacist but did not work outside the home. (GX 4.) She was killed in an automobile 
accident on July 31, 2017. (AX H.) None of his living family members know what he does 
for a living. (Tr. 65-66.) 
 
 Applicant has monthly telephone contact with his siblings and his in-laws. (GX 1 at 
31-38; GX 3 at 27-39.) Communication with his brother is difficult because of his brother’s 
mental condition. (Tr. 59.) His last personal contact with his brother-in-law was five or six 
years ago when his brother-in-law accompanied his mother-in-law on a visit to the United 
States. (Tr. 64.) 
 
  When Applicant first applied for a security clearance, he owned a townhome in 
Egypt and kept a bank account in Egypt. He sold the townhome in November 2014 and 
closed the bank account in March 2016. (Enclosure to SOR Answer; GX 5; AX A-C.)  
 
In the United States, Applicant has owned the family home since December 1999. 
(GX 1 at 8-9.) He and his wife also own a second home, have savings accounts in U.S. 
banks, and have a net worth of about $700,000. (GX 6 at 2.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant served as vice-president of his community’s homeowners’ association 
from 2011 to 2013. He remains active in the association, and he recently coordinated with 
an adjoining homeowners’ association on the construction of sidewalks and bicycle paths. 
(Tr. 34-35, 66-67.) A close friend of Applicant, with whom Applicant socializes, plays 
tennis, and worships, has worked with Applicant on community projects and found that 
he played an “essential role” in improving their community. (Tr. 34-35.) Three of 
Applicant’s neighbors who are involved in the homeowners’ association described 
Applicant as an active, cooperative, and helpful member of the association. (Tr. 43-47; 
AX D; AX F.) Another neighbor describes Applicant as “a good, decent family man of 
great character and judgment.” (AX G.)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor for the past seven years testified that Applicant is humble, 
hardworking, and “somebody that I can close my eyes and count on.” He is aware of 
Applicant’s foreign family ties and has no concerns about his loyalty to the United States. 
(Tr. 26-27.) A former supervisor for two or three years describes Applicant as an open-
minded, hardworking colleague. (AX E.) 
 
 Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world and the second-most 
populous on the African Continent. In the past, the United States and Egypt have had a 
strong and friendly relationship based on shared mutual interest in Middle East peace 
and stability. U.S. policy toward Egypt has long been regarded as an investment in 
regional stability. There is no evidence that Egypt has targeted the United States for 
military or economic intelligence. However, after a popular revolution which began in 
January 2011, the relationship has become uncertain, with more indications of anti-
Americanism, radical Islamist policies, and antipathy towards Israel. Egypt has suffered 
from numerous terrorist attacks, where foreigners, including Americans, have been killed, 
injured, or kidnapped. The U.S. Department of State has warned U.S. citizens considering 
travel to Egypt about potential terrorist attacks and violent political protests. The U.S. 
Mission in Egypt restricts its employees and their family members from traveling outside 
greater Cairo and Alexandria without prior approval, and it advises all U.S. citizens to 
carefully consider the security implications of travel outside Cairo, Alexandria, and major 
tourist destinations. Significant human-rights abuses by security forces have occurred, 
including excessive use of force, unlawful killings and torture, excessive use of 
preventative custody and pretrial detention, and limitations on due process during trials. 
 
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by a king who is both head of state and head of 
government. The Koran is the constitution of the country and Islamic (Sharia) Law is the 
basis for its government. The United States and Saudi Arabia have a longstanding 
security relationship. Saudi Arabia is the United States’ largest customer for foreign 
military sales. The United States provides training and advisory services for the Saudi 
Ministry of Defense and assists in the modernization of the Saudi National Guard. The 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is significantly involved in military and civilian construction 
in Saudi Arabia. The two countries have various governmental exchange programs. They 
enjoy a strong economic relationship, in that the United States is Saudi Arabia’s largest 
trading partner and Saudi Arabia is one of the United States’ largest trading partners in 
the Middle East. Relations between the United States and Saudi Arabia were strained 
 
5 
 
after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Towers in September 2001. There were 34 
terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia in 2016, targeting Saudi and Western government 
interests, significant religious sites, and places frequented by U.S. citizens and other 
Westerners. 
 
Saudi Arabia has ongoing human-rights problems, including abuse of prisoners 
and detainees; restrictions on freedom of speech, press, peaceful assembly, and religion; 
and systematic discrimination against women and ethnic and religious minorities. The 
U.S. Department of State warns U.S. citizens to carefully consider the risks of travel 
because of continuing threats from terrorist groups.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
 
6 
 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual maybe manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
 
7 
 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation 
or personal conflict of interest. 
 
When family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign 
country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-
22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's 
spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).  
 
The evidence reflects that one of Applicant’s two sisters passed away in January 
2015. It also reflects that he had one brother-in-law and one sister-in-law living in Saudi 
Arabia, instead of two brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, and it 
reflects that his sister-in-law was recently killed in an automobile accident.  
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(e), and 7(f) all require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” 
The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. Applicant no longer has 
financial interests in Egypt. However, presence of his brother, sister, and mother-in-law 
in Egypt; the presence of his brother-in-law in Saudi Arabia; and the activities of terrorist 
and insurgent groups in both countries are sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” of 
foreign influence encompassed by AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) and the potential conflict of 
interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. The unsettled nature of the current relationship 
between the United States and Egypt and the terrorist and insurgent activity in Egypt and 
Saudi Arabia preclude a finding that a situation requiring a choice between the interests 
of the United States and the foreign country is unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant’s only connection with Saudi Arabia is through 
the employment of his brother-in-law in that country. He has ties of affection and obligation 
to his mother, mother-in-law, brother, and sister in Egypt, but those ties are outweighed 
by his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. He has lived 
in the United States for 25 years. He has worked for federal contractors for 16 years. He 
has been a U.S. citizen for almost nine years. His wife and children are U.S. citizens. The 
net worth of his financial interests in the United States is about $700,000, and he no 
longer has any financial interests in Egypt. He has earned the trust of his supervisors. He 
is an active and respected member of his community. I am satisfied that he would resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
 
9 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) is not established for Applicant’s communication with his mother, 
siblings, and in-laws. There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate 
family member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). Applicant has not overcome the presumption. He also has not 
overcome the presumption that he has ties of affection or obligation to his in-laws. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-person concept, an 
administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by 
considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. An 
administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis 
and considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d).  Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at 
the hearing. He left Egypt after he graduated from college in May 1985 and has not 
returned except for visits to his family. His entire adult life and professional career has 
been in the United States. His ties to Egypt and Saudi Arabia are significantly less than 
they were when his previous application for a security clearance was denied in May 2013, 
because he no longer owns property in Egypt and his older sister and his sister-in-law 
have passed away. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has refuted the allegation that he has a bank account in Egypt and mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his family ties to Egypt and Saudi Arabia. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
  
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
