 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01714 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) The Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
August 17, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
 
2 
 
 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 13, 2016, admitting the seven 
allegations of delinquent debt under Guideline F. He elected to have the matter decided 
on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on October 6, 2016. (Item 7) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on October 17, 2016. He was provided the opportunity to file objections and to 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on August 8, 2017.   
   
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 51 years old. He graduated from high school in June 1984. Applicant 
married in March 1992 and has one child and one stepchild. He has been eligible for 
access to classified information since 2007. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated December 8, 2014) 
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 3, dated February 26, 2015; Item 4, 
dated April 14, 2016), confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a July 2014 
wage garnishment for the United States Treasury for $18,456 (SOR 1.a); a failure to file 
federal income tax returns for 2011 and 2013 (SOR 1.b); failure to file state income tax 
returns for 2011 and 2013 (SOR 1.c); delinquent state tax for 2009 of $5,505 (SOR 1.d); 
delinquent state taxes for the same state of $404 for tax year 2012 (SOR 1.e); 
delinquent state taxes for the same state for tax year 2014 for $1,175 (SOR 1.f); and a 
past due debt to a mail order company of $113 with a balance of $455 (SOR 1.g).  
 
 Applicant listed the failure to file federal and state tax returns, the wage 
garnishment, and a delinquent loan on his e-QIP. (Item 2) In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the wage garnishment of $18,456; his failure to file federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2009, 2012, and 2013; that as a result of his failure to 
file state income tax returns, he owes state income taxes for 2009, 2012, and 2014; and 
that he has a debt to a mail order company of $455. He noted that he had his tax 
returns prepared, but he did not turn them in to the proper tax authorities until 
September 7, 2016. (Item 7, Response to SOR, dated September 13, 2016)  
 
 Applicant claims that he was contacting the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and 
state tax authorities to make payment arrangements for the taxes owed. Applicant noted 
that the delinquent debt is his own fault and that he wants to resolve the issues. He 
works hard six or seven days a week and it takes all he can do to meet his financial 
obligations. There is no information in the case file concerning the cause of the 
delinquent debt, any financial counseling received, or future plans and actions to 
resolve the delinquent debt. There is no information in the case file of any contact with 
the IRS or state tax office. 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet his financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admitted, that he has delinquent tax and 
consumer debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and; 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.  
 
 The information raises issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. The debts are a 
normal consumer debt or arose from his failure to timely file his Federal and state 
income tax returns. In his response to the SOR, Applicant noted that the tax returns 
were prepared and he simply did not file them with the proper tax authorities as 
required. He further indicated that he was making arrangements to pay the Federal and 
state income taxes. He did not present any documents to verify the plans or payment 
arrangements for the taxes or any debts. Applicant was advised by Department Counsel 
in the FORM that he needed to provide proof of his claims of payment or resolution of 
the debts. He has not documented his plans to resolve his financial problems or his 
claimed efforts to pay and resolve his delinquent debts. He also did not provide 
information concerning financial counseling. Accordingly, he has not established a 
good-faith effort to pay her debts.  
 
 Applicant has been gainfully employed since at least June 1990. He appears to 
have the ability to resolve his delinquent debts. However, he has not acted responsibly 
because he just did not file his federal and state tax returns after the documents were 
prepare. There is no clear evidence that his debt problems have been resolved, and his 
finances are not under control. Overall, he has not provided evidence or proof that he 
acted with reason and responsibility towards his finances. His lack of documented 
actions to resolve his financial problems are a strong indication that he may not protect 
and safeguard classified information. In sum, Applicant did not present sufficient 
information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to timely file his 
Federal and state income tax returns, and he did not provide proof that he was 
implementing his plan to pay his delinquent taxes and debts. In requesting an 
administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, 
he failed to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
financial circumstances; to adequately document and articulate his positions; and to 
provide facts to mitigate the financial security concerns. In short, the file lacks sufficient 
evidence provided by Applicant to establish arrangements to pay, settle, compromised, 
disputed, or otherwise resolved his delinquent accounts. The record lacks corroborating 
or substantial documents and details to explain his finances.  
 
 I am unable to determine that Applicant reasonably and responsibly managed his 
finances and that his finances are under control because Applicant failed to provide 
documents to verify the appropriate management of his finance and actions to resolve 
financial issues. In short, Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of his 
finances and a consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. His lack of 
demonstrated financial action is a firm indication that he may not adequately safeguard 
classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not 
established his suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate financial security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
