 
 
 
 
1 
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ADP Case No: 16-01362 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dana Jacobson, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the alcohol trustworthiness concerns related to his 
history of excessive consumption. National security eligibility for a position of trust is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the previous Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 
2006. This decision applies the new AG that were implemented on June 8, 2017.1  
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, as well as the new AG. This decision would be the same if the case was 
decided under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 29, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 31, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On December 21, 
2016, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for January 19, 2017. The case 
proceeded as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 
2 into evidence. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through C into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 27, 2017.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR, except SOR ¶ 1.d, which he neither 
admitted nor denied on the basis that he had not reviewed the information. His response 
is construed as a denial. (Answer.) His admissions are incorporated into these findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and married to his second wife since 1992. He adopted 
his wife’s son. He served in the Navy from November 1976 to November 1998, when he 
retired and received an honorable discharge. He held a secret security clearance from 
1994 until 1998. He earned an associate’s degree in 2007, a bachelor’s degree in 2010, 
and a master’s degree in 2014. He has worked for federal contractors since 2001. (GE 
1.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol problems and abuse. He admitted that he has 
consumed alcohol to excess and the point of intoxication from June 1980 to October 2010. 
While in the Navy, he was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI) four times: twice 
in 1980, once in 1981, and once in 1982. After his second DUI arrest in 1980, Applicant 
was ordered to complete an alcohol treatment program, which he was unable to finish 
because of mission requirements. Before his arrest in 1981, he drank about 12 beers 
while driving and crashed his car. He was subsequently required to attend and complete 
a 30-day alcohol treatment program, which he did. Before his 1982 arrest, he drank eight 
to ten beers while driving and again crashed his car. He was ordered to participate in a 
90-day inpatient alcohol program and required to abstain from consuming alcohol. He 
completed the program and did not drink for those 90 days. (Tr. 47-49.)  
 
 Applicant admitted that between 1980 and 1982 he consumed 10 to 12 beers 
about twice a week. He was in his early 20’s at the time. He admitted that he also blacked-
out from excessive alcohol consumption at least six times, the last time occurring in 2004. 
Between 1983 and 1986, Applicant consumed four to six beers once a month during 
weekend leave while on active duty and living on a ship. From 1986 to 1992, he drank six 
to eight beers three or four days a week. From 1992 to 1996, he consumed eight beers 
at one sitting during the holidays. (Tr. 49-50, 52, 59.) 
 
 During an October 22, 2010 interview with an investigator with another federal 
agency Applicant said that from 1997 until October 2010 he consumed ten beers on the 
last working day of the week at home. He said six beers intoxicate him. He told the 
 
 
 
 
3 
investigator that he was intoxicated on October 18, 2010, the last day of the previous 
work week. (Tr. 50-52; GE 2.) From 2010 to October 2016, Applicant stated that he 
reduced the number of beers he consumed once a week from ten to four or six. (AE A.) 
 
 In March 2011, Applicant was evaluated by a psychological services department 
for another federal agency. During the evaluation, he admitted that he had been 
intoxicated 52 times during the prior year (2010), essentially once a week. Since 1996 he 
has been intoxicated once a week. Six beers make him inebriated. The evaluation 
concluded that Applicant met the criteria for a diagnosis of alcohol dependence, in 
sustained partial remission. The evaluation recommended that Applicant abstain from 
alcohol for one year to demonstrate a consistent pattern of abstinence and reduce his risk 
for disclosing classified or sensitive information. Applicant said he has never abstained 
from consuming alcohol for one year. (Tr. 53; GE 2.) The agency performing the 
evaluation denied Applicant’s application for access to specific information. (GE 2.) 
  
 In January 2017, Applicant participated in a psychiatric evaluation with a board-
certified psychiatrist, who has a specialty in addictions medicine. The psychiatrist 
diagnosed him with an alcohol use disorder, in sustained partial remission. He noted that 
Applicant has demonstrated his ability to control his drinking and that no physician ever 
recommended that Applicant stop consuming alcohol. He noted that for the past five or 
six years Applicant reduced his consumption of beer from ten beers to four or six beers 
one day a week. He noted that there were no instances in which Applicant appeared 
intoxicated at work. Applicant told the psychiatrist that he had not consumed alcohol since 
the last week of October 2016, at which time he was preparing for hip surgery the 
following week in November 2016. The psychiatrist opined that based on his observation 
and Applicant’s medical and alcohol treatment history while in the Navy, Applicant does 
not pose a significant risk to national security. (Tr. 55; AE A.) 
 
  Applicant said he has not consumed alcohol since the last week in October 2016, 
at which time he had four beers at home. (Tr. 60.) He has not had alcohol since then 
because he is taking medications and undergoing physical therapy for his hip. (Tr. 58, 
60.) He does not know if he will resume drinking alcohol, but “wouldn’t rule it out.” (Tr. 
59.) The last time he was intoxicated was in August or September 2016, after consuming 
six beers at home at the end of his working week. He does not believe he has a drinking 
problem because he is able to manage it by limiting the amount he drinks to six beers, 
once a week at home. (Tr. 61, 74.) He has not received alcohol treatment since 1982, 
when he participated in the Navy’s inpatient program. (Tr. 62, 74.) 
 
 Applicant’s former supervisor testified. She has known Applicant for six or seven 
years and was his direct supervisor for three years. She saw him every day at work and 
at company events. She never observed him consume alcohol. She found him to be one 
of the top five analysts on her team. She has had no reason to question his fitness to 
perform his job. (Tr. 15-26.) Another former supervisor wrote that Applicant is “hard-
working, dedicated and never leaves a job unfinished.” (AE B.) Applicant’s team assistant 
supervisor submitted a letter of recommendation. He has known Applicant for four years. 
 
 
 
 
4 
He stated that there have not been any complaints against Applicant. He has found 
Applicant to be punctual and responsible. (AE C.)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks a position of trust enters into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends normal 
duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a high 
degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants a position of trust. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 sets out the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes four conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or license clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder; and  
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder. 
 
While in the Navy, Applicant was arrested and convicted of DUI four times: twice 
in 1980, once in 1981, and once in 1982. Between 1983 and 1996, he consistently 
consumed between four to eight beers either once a week or once a month to the point 
of intoxication. From 1997 to October 2010, he admitted being intoxicated once a week 
after consuming 10 beers at home. From October 2010 to October 2016, he reduced his 
consumption to four to six beers once a week. He has had at least six blackouts in his 
life, the last one occurred in 2004. In March 2011, a psychological services department 
diagnosed Applicant with alcohol dependence, in sustained remission. It recommended 
that he abstain from alcohol for at least one year. In January 2017, a psychiatrist 
diagnosed him with alcohol use disorder, in sustained partial remission. Applicant 
continued to consume alcohol until the end of October 2016, at which time he was 
preparing for hip surgery. The evidence established the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns raised under 
this guideline: 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
Applicant has a 37-year history of consuming alcohol to the point of intoxication, 
spanning from 1980 to October 2016. Insufficient time has passed to determine whether 
Applicant’s pattern of drinking to intoxication will recur. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 23(a). 
 
Applicant does not believe that he has a problem with alcohol because he controls 
his consumption by limiting the number of beers he drinks and only consumes them once 
a week at home. Although he has decreased the number of beers he consumes since 
October 2010 (from ten to six), he continues to consistently drink to the point of 
intoxication, which is not construed as modified consumption under these guidelines. The 
evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 23(b).  
 
Applicant completed a 90-day alcohol treatment program in 1982. The record does 
not contain any information about that program. It is unknown whether he participated in 
an alcohol evaluation, received a diagnosis, or was discharged with aftercare 
recommendations that he followed. He is not currently participating in counseling or a 
treatment program. There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 23(c) 
or AG ¶ 23(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 AG ¶ 2(a) requires an administrative judge to evaluate an applicant’s national 
security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances, commonly referred to as the whole-person concept. Under AG ¶ 2(c) the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position of trust must include an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
 
 
 
 
7 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge should consider the following nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d) in making that decision: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) 
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible, intelligent, and 
educated 58-year-old man, who honorably served in the military for 22 years. Since 2004, 
he has successfully worked for defense contractors, as documented by his former 
supervisor and two letters of recommendation. These are persuasive factors in the 
analysis of the whole person. 
 
However, Applicant has a long history of consuming alcohol to the point of 
intoxication. Although he has not been arrested for any alcohol-related crime since 1982 
and asserted that his last black-out was in 2004, his consistent weekly pattern of drinking 
to the point of becoming intoxicated is concerning.    
 
In March 2011, after being evaluated for alcohol issues and diagnosed with an 
alcohol abuse disorder, in sustained partial remission, Applicant was advised to abstain 
from consuming alcohol for one year, in order to reduce his risk of releasing classified or 
sensitive information. The agency that requested the evaluation subsequently denied him 
eligibility to its program as a consequence of his history of alcohol problems. 
  
Applicant did not heed that advice and made a decision to continue consuming 
alcohol to the point of intoxication once a week up to the last week in October 2016. 
Applicant’s current psychiatric evaluation diagnosed him with an alcohol use disorder, in 
sustained partial remission. The psychiatrist concluded that based on Applicant’s 
treatment in 1982 and his ability to control his drinking when he chooses, he does not 
pose “a significant risk to national security.” I disagree. While Applicant may not pose a 
“significant risk” in handling sensitive information as a consequence of his managed 
drinking, the AG mandates that the standard for determining national security eligibility 
for a position of trust is whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a 
favorable decision. In this case, the answer is no. Managing one’s repeated consumption 
of alcohol to the point of intoxication is not an acceptable risk or in the national interest.     
 
The record evidence leaves me with serious questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
for a position of trust. He failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the 
guideline for alcohol consumption.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:        Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility. 
Applicant’s request for a position of trust is denied. 
 
                                             
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
