 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00467 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cathryn E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
August 31, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 27, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines M and E.1 The SOR 
further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
On June 27, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR (RSOR), and 
requested that the case be decided after a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to this administrative judge on November 4, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) first issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
2016, scheduling the hearing for December 5, 2016. Because of scheduling conflicts, a 
second notice of hearing was issued on November 21, 2016, scheduling the hearing for 
January 10, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and presented six 
documents, which were also admitted without objection as Exhibits A through F. One 
additional witness testified on behalf of Applicant. The record was left open until 
January 24, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. Documents were submitted 
and have been marked and entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits G 
through I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on January 19, 2017. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant and the 
additional witness, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 On August 30, 2016, Department Counsel amended the SOR, adding a second 
allegation under both Guidelines M and E. (1.b. and 2.b.) On October 3, 2016, Applicant 
submitted a reply to the amended SOR admitting in part and denying in part allegation 
1. b. and denying 2.b. These amended allegations will be further discussed under each 
guideline.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. She is unmarried, but was previously married from 
1997 to 2012, and she has one daughter.  Applicant received a Bachelor of Arts degree 
in Criminal Justice in 1990. Applicant is employed as a security administrator for a state 
agency, and she is employed part-time for four other companies, including defense 
contractors, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her 
employment in the defense sector. (Tr at 51-53.) 
 
Guideline M – Use of Information Technology  
 
 The initial SOR lists one allegation regarding Use if Information Technology. As 
discussed above, the SOR was amended to add one additional allegation under 
Adjudicative Guideline M. 
 
 1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was terminated from her place of 
employment (Company A) in 2014 for violation of company policy due to her misuse of 
the company computer by allowing representatives of the Defense Security Service to 
query her for other business through Company A’s email system, and for actively 
engaging in work for other companies using Company A’s business systems to support 
her work for other companies. A Notice of Determination/Ruling was introduced. It 
 
3 
 
showed that Applicant did not receive unemployment benefits because she broke an 
employer rule and was thereafter discharged from Company A. (Exhibit 4.) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she began working at Company A in 2011 
as the Facility Security Officer (FSO) and was terminated in 2014. She stated that in the 
three years she was employed by Company A she had at least seven direct 
supervisors. She indicated that the company was unstable, and during her tenure at the 
company between 75 and 100 people were either laid off or terminated. Prior to her 
working with Company A she had been involved with consulting and advising small 
companies with security issues, and she discussed with the owners at Company A that 
she wanted to continue consulting and advising other companies. She was informed 
that she could continue to do that as a Company A employee. She further testified that 
Company A was eventually sold, and the new employers were made aware of her 
arrangement with the company regarding consulting. (Tr at 60-70.) Applicant listed 
several individuals who were aware of her consulting, which included the CEO and a 
vice-president of Company A, as well as the HR manager and her recruiter who helped 
bring her in the company. (Tr at 106-107.)   
 
Applicant conceded that she used Company A’s computer while doing her 
consulting, but it was not only approved, it was encouraged to give her the opportunity 
to win an award called the Cogswel award, which is presented to individuals who are 
outstanding in the security field, and which is considered highly prestigious and would 
reflect positively on Company A. Applicant ultimately won the Cogwhel award. Applicant 
averred that had she never been made aware that she was not allowed to do her 
consulting on a company computer. If she had been made aware, she would have 
ceased using the company computer and used a different system that was available to 
her. (Tr at 70-77.)  
 
In 2014, she was called into her manager’s office with the human resource 
manager also in attendance, and she was informed that she was going to be terminated 
because of her consulting using the company computer. She explained that she had 
never been informed before her termination, in verbal or written form, not to use the 
company computer for her consulting, and she would cease immediately. She was told 
that she was simply terminated, and would be given no further opportunity to resolve the 
issue. She also testified that if she had been informed that she had to stop consulting, 
she would have done so immediately, but then she would have pursued another job 
since she did enjoy consulting and helping other companies. Applicant testified that she 
was extremely surprised at her dismissal as she had always received positive 
evaluations, and when she arrived at the company she took their security ratings from 
poor to superior. (Tr at 77-80.)   
 
Applicant conjectured that she was dismissed as she was earning a very high 
salary, and because the company that purchased Company A did not realize the poor 
financial position of Company A, many individuals had to be laid off or terminated. (Tr at 
81-82.)  Applicant testified strongly and extremely credibly that she never received any 
notice during her time employed at Company A that any of her conduct at Company A 
 
4 
 
was a violation of company policy. If she had received such notice she would have 
ceased the conduct immediately and never done it again. (Tr at 147-148.)     
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the amended SOR that Applicant was terminated from 
Company B in 2010 for emailing personally identifiable information (PII) in open email 
and not following proper procedure in relation to processing security clearances and 
utilizing the JPAS system.  
 
Applicant testified that she began working at Company B in 2008 after she was 
recruited by the FSO. She was hired to lead six people in the personal security 
clearance division. The FSO retired and Applicant opined that his replacement seemed 
to not like Applicant from the day he started at Company B, which made it a hostile work 
environment. Applicant explained that before an employee from her company was sent 
overseas, Applicant was to make certain that the person had an interim clearance. On 
multiple occasions she had to have a person removed from a plane because they did 
not have an interim clearance. The incident that is cited as the reason for her dismissal 
is Applicant emailed to a Company B representative overseas, regarding a Company B 
employee who was already overseas, asking why the employee was there if he did not 
have an interim security clearance. She stated that this was the same procedure that 
had been used before and did not violate the rules for emailing information. (Tr at 82-
92.) In this case, she simply emailed asking why an individual who did not have an 
interim clearance was somewhere where that was required. She never included the 
person’s social security number or any other information other than his name. (Tr at 
126-139.) 
 
Applicant testified that she had believed she was terminated, but when she met 
with a government investigator after completing her security clearance application, she 
was told that the record showed she was laid off, not terminated. She was also told by a 
former employee of Company B that she was laid off, not terminated. She now believes 
that she was laid off and not terminated. Applicant did receive a two week severance 
pay after her employment ended with Company B. (Tr at 143-144.) Applicant also 
testified strongly and credibly that she never received any notice during her time 
employed at Company B that any of her conduct at Company B was a violation of 
company policy. If she had received such notice she would have ceased the conduct 
and never done it again. (Tr at 146-147.) 
 
This allegation was primarily based on a statement made by a former co-worker 
of Applicant. (Exhibit 5.)  Applicant addressed the allegations in this statement in great 
detail, and with significant specificity. (Tr at 92-101.) Based on Applicant's extremely 
credible testimony refuting this statement, the testimony of the other witness, discussed 
below, and the other positive evidence on Applicant's behalf, I find this statement to 
have limited credibility and probative value.       
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The initial SOR lists one allegation regarding Guideline E, Personal Conduct. As 
discussed above, the SOR was amended to add one additional allegation under 
Adjudicative Guideline E. 
 
 2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct, discussed in 1.a., above, 
raises concern under Guideline E. Applicant denied this allegation. 
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct, discussed in 1.b., above, 
raises concern under Guideline E. Applicant denied this allegation. 
  
Mitigation  
 
 As reviewed above, one additional witness testified on behalf of Applicant. The 
witness is the vice president of industrial security for a DoD contracting company, and 
has held a security clearance for more than 30 years. The witness has known Applicant 
since 2004, when she became Applicant’s supervisor. The witness testified that 
Applicant was trustworthy, reliable and displayed good judgment. Finally, the witness 
testified that based on her long knowledge of Applicant, the information expressed in 
Exhibit 5 was completely untrue and unreliable. (Tr at 20-48.)   
  
Applicant also submitted a number of documents in mitigation. They include an 
extremely positive character letter from Applicant's former supervisor at Company B.  
He wrote that Applicant worked for him for two years and she was outstanding in her 
position as Manager or the clearance division. He described her as “one of the most 
knowledgeable individuals in Industrial Security Field.” He also wrote that she was 
allowed to resign from her position at Company B and that if she had been terminated, 
based on her excellent record, “the company would be in jeopardy of a wrongful 
termination lawsuit.” (Exhibit A.) The second letter was from a friend and co-worker of 
Applicant's from Company A. She wrote that she had been informed by the VP of 
Human Resources when Applicant began working at Company A that Applicant would 
be consulting with other businesses with whom Applicant already was consulting prior to 
joining Company A. This woman also emphasized that Applicant always followed the 
rules and regulations of security. (Exhibit B.)  A third letter came from an individual, who 
is Applicant’s current employer and a vice president of the company. He described 
Applicant as a person “of good moral character,” and “a decent person at the core and 
only wants to do what is right.” Four additional extremely laudatory and positive 
character letters were also submitted on behalf of Applicant. (Exhibit C.) Additional 
awards and certificates were also submitted on behalf of Applicant. (Exhibit D.) 
 
Applicant also submitted her performance evaluations for Company A for March 
2011 to December 2013, for a current employer dated September 2015, and another 
current employer dated 2015. (Exhibits G, H, I.) Her overall rating for Company A was 
4.2 out of 5, which is considered “Highly Successful.”  Her other evaluation ratings were 
also excellent.   
 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40.  
 
(a) unauthorized entry into any information technology system; 
 
(b) unauthorized modification, destruction, or manipulation of, or denial of 
access to, an information technology system or any data in such a system; 
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified, sensitive, proprietary, 
or other protected information on or to any unauthorized information 
technology system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system; 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized; 
 
(g) negligence or lax security practices in handling information technology 
that persists despite counseling by management; and 
 
(h) any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, 
that results in damage to the national security. 
 
 
8 
 
Based on the allegations and the facts of this case concerning Applicant's history 
with both Company A and Company B, I find that AG ¶ 40 (e) and (g) are potentially 
applicable in this case for SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.b., respectively.    
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done solely in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness; 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification to 
appropriate personnel; and 
 
(d) the misuse was due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions. 
 
 I found Applicant's testimony regarding Company A (1.a.) credible and 
persuasive that she began her Company A employment with a very clear understanding 
that she was allowed to do consulting work in addition to her full-time position with 
Company A, and that she was allowed to use her company computer to contact other 
individuals and companies that could use her help and guidance on security issues, 
whether or not she was compensated. I also found persuasive that during her entire 
tenure at Company A Applicant never received a notice, oral or written, informing her 
that she must cease her consulting work or that she must cease using the company 
computer for her consulting business. Finally, Applicant's testimony that if she had 
received such a notice, she would have immediately ceased the proscribed conduct 
was extremely reasonable and believable. Not only did I consider Applicant's demeanor 
and perceived veracity in reaching my decision, I considered her overall employment 
history, the very powerful testimony of the character witness, and the very persuasive 
character letters written on her behalf.   
 
 Regarding Company B (1.b.), I find that the evidence strongly suggests that 
Applicant was not terminated from this position, but was “laid off,” and that her conduct 
did not violate company policy or general rules and regulations regarding emailing PII. I 
considered the same factors discussed above that I used in analyzing 1.a. to analyze 
1.b. 
 
Based on the analysis discussed in the two paragraphs above I find that mitigating 
factors AG ¶ 41 (a) and (d) are applicable and controlling in this case for SOR allegations 
1.a. and 1.b. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16.: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
 
10 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
Because I did not find that Applicant exhibited conduct that supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information; I do not find that any of the disqualifying conditions are applicable in this 
case under AG ¶ 16.    
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I did not 
consider the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 since none of the disqualifying 
conditions were established in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
11 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines M and E in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with no significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
