 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-00943 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John F. Adamson, Personal Representative 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 1, 
2015 (SCA). On August 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines J and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
27, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017. On February 28, 
2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for March 29, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence. I admitted GE 1 
over Applicant’s objection,1 and GE 2 without objection. I appended to the record a 
letter the Government sent to Applicant as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the 
Government’s exhibit list as HE II. At the hearing, Applicant and one witness testified. At 
Applicant’s request, I left the record open to May 5, 2017. Applicant timely provided one 
document that I admitted into evidence as AE A, without objection. The Government 
also timely provided GE 3, which I admitted over Applicant’s objection. I appended to 
the record all post-hearing emails as HE III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 
7, 2017.2 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.3 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.4 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date of the hearing, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. Having considered 
both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have been the same had I 
applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 At the hearing, I granted the Government’s motion, without objection, to amend 
the SOR to conform to Applicant’s testimony at the hearing.  I added ¶ 1.f to the SOR, 
as follows: 
 
f. You were arrested and charged in February 2017 with disturbing the peace and 
carrying a dangerous weapon. 
 
After being offered additional time to respond to the new allegation SOR ¶ 1.f, 
including the option to continue the matter for a second hearing, Applicant opted against 
a second hearing. Instead, he requested that the record be left open to May 5, 2017 to 
allow him the opportunity to provide witness statements and the court’s disposition, 
which was anticipated to be April 28, 2017. I granted his request and directed that he 
answer either “admit” or “deny” the allegation by the close of the record. I also granted 
Government’s request for an opportunity to provide court or arrest records before the 
close of the record. With respect to SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant never provided any documents 
or an answer. The Government provided records as noted above.5  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-31; GE 2 at 5. 
 
2 Tr. at 109-110; HE III. 
 
3 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose).  The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information.  (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
4 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
5 Tr. at 78-82, 109; HE III. 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact6 
 
Applicant, age 26, has never been married. He has a four-year-old daughter. He 
received his high school diploma in 2008. He was employed as a welder for a defense 
contractor from October 2015 through August 2016, when he was laid off pending 
adjudication of his security clearance. He is eligible for rehire. Applicant was granted a 
security clearance during his brief period in a delayed entry program for the U.S. Navy. 
It was revoked because he did not complete the program. This is his first application for 
a security clearance since then.7  
 
The SOR, as amended, contains six allegations under Guideline J for criminal 
activity that occurred between 2011 and 2017 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f), five of which 
are also cross-alleged under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 1.a). A second Guideline E allegation 
involves Applicant’s 2010 violation of company policy. Applicant admitted all but one of 
the Guideline J allegations and both Guideline E allegations. Applicant did not admit or 
deny the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
 
 In 2011, Applicant and three friends went on a “spree,” during which they 
smashed the windows of automobiles and painted graffiti on public property. Applicant 
did not paint any graffiti, but served as a “lookout” while his friends did so. For his part in 
these actions, Applicant was arrested and charged with four counts of vandalism and 
four counts of conspiracy (SOR ¶ 1.a). He acknowledged that his actions were the 
result of “bad decisions” he made trying to fit in since he did not have many friends at 
the time and did not “get out much.” He continues to associate with the three friends, 
who are no longer involved with any criminal activity. The court convicted Applicant on 
all eight counts and ordered him to pay restitution and serve one year of probation.8 
 
 Applicant was charged with driving on a suspended license four times, including 
twice on the same day, in January 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c), once in February 2012 (SOR ¶ 
1.b), and once in August 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.e). Knowing that his license had been 
suspended for an unpaid speeding ticket, Applicant drove his vehicle in January 2012 to 
get food and to bring someone home, and in February 2012 because he was the only 
one present who knew how to operate a manual transmission. In his SOR answer, 
Applicant acknowledged that at the time, he was “just plain dumb” and thought he 
“could get away with anything.” 9 
 
In August 2015, Applicant drove his vehicle without knowing that his license had 
been suspended. He later learned that it was suspended because he defaulted on an 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR Answer and his SCA (GE 1). 
 
7 See also Tr. at 48-50, 87. 
 
8 See also GE 2 at 10-12; Tr. at 36-37, 51-58, 83. 
 
9 See also GE 2 at 8, 10-12; Tr. at 37-40, 58-61, 67-70, 91-94. 
 
 
4 
 
arrangement he made to pay a court judgment entered against him in favor of an 
insurance company for his involvement in a car accident. While he knew that he 
defaulted due to lack of funds, he had not realized that it triggered a suspension of his 
license. The court found him guilty after Applicant pled nolo contendere, and ordered 
him to pay a fine of $750. Immediately after, Applicant sold his vehicle to remove any 
temptation to drive again without a license, and has not driven a vehicle since then. As 
of the hearing date, he was working with an attorney to negotiate a new payment 
arrangement and to reinstate his license.10  
 
 In March 2015, the police executed an outstanding arrest warrant against 
Applicant (SOR ¶ 1.d). The warrant was issued because he missed a payment per his 
arrangement to pay the fine stemming from his 2011 charges in monthly installments of 
$5. He missed the payment by only a few days. At the hearing, he could not recall the 
reason for missing the payment but opined that he had “a lot going on” and “might not 
even have had the $5 at the time.” The bail commissioner ordered him to immediately 
pay $400 for the balance of the fine owed, which he paid with the help of a friend. As of 
the date of the hearing, Applicant had no outstanding court fines or fees.11 
 
In February 2017, Applicant was arrested and charged with 2nd degree breach of 
peace (a misdemeanor) and carrying a dangerous weapon (a felony) (SOR ¶ 2.f). The 
record does not contain the court’s disposition of the charges. Applicant claimed that he 
attempted to defend a female neighbor from what he believed to be a threat of harm 
from Person A (a male). He also claimed that Person A threated to kill her if she did not 
open the door, and that his actions saved her life. During the confrontation with Person 
A, he and a friend brandished BB guns, that resembled real firearms, to intimidate 
Person A and encourage him to leave. He claimed that his BB gun was a “glorified toy” 
with an orange tip, which should not have been perceived as a real weapon. He also 
claimed that he “just held” the BB gun to threaten him. He did not call the police to 
report the incident.12 
 
 The police were initially called to the scene by Neighbor A (a male) who reported 
being threatened by Person A over a parking spot. Neighbor A, who resided in the same 
apartment building as Applicant, reported that Person A came to his door yelling and 
threatening to damage his vehicle if he did not move it. However, shortly after that initial 
call, they received a second call from Neighbors B (a male and female who lived across 
the street from Applicant) who were initially disturbed by yelling outside of their window. 
Upon investigation, they saw Applicant and his friend brandishing firearms and moving 
around the vicinity in a “military fashion,” taking up position behind a car, and then 
behind a row of bushes. They also saw Applicant and his friend yelling at Person A in 
                                                          
10 See also GE 2 at 8, 10-12; Tr. at 37-40, 58-61, 67-70, 91-94. 
 
11 See also GE 2 at 8; Tr at 38-39; 61-66, 84. 
 
12 Tr. at 72-82, 84-87, 90-91; GE 3. 
 
 
5 
 
the yard outside of Applicant’s apartment building. They called the police because they 
were scared for themselves and others who may have been outside. 13 
  
The responding police officers reported that Applicant and his friend both gave 
almost the same “story.” They both acknowledged that, after hearing Person A arguing 
with someone, they brandished BB guns to confront him and told him to leave. The 
difference between their stories was that Applicant stated that the “someone” was a 
female. Neither mentioned hearing Person A threaten that someone. However, the 
officers believed that the argument they actually heard was that between Neighbor A 
and Person A. Applicant’s BB gun was an HK45 replica and his friend’s BB gun was an 
Ar-15 assault weapon replica. One of the responding officers reported that both guns 
were “extremely well designed airsoft guns that exactly resembled their actual 
functioning counterparts,” with no mention that either had an orange tip. Neighbors B 
and the responding officers all perceived the weapons brandished by Applicant and his 
friend to be real. The officers responding to the scene drew their weapons and secured 
the scene accordingly.14 
  
Applicant worked as a welder for Employer A from February 2010 and October 
2010, when he was fired for underperforming due to delays that he caused on the 
assembly line on which he worked (SOR ¶ 2.b). Prior to his termination, he had been 
verbally reprimanded on several occasions for those delays and, on one occasion, for 
using a cell phone to make a call. On the day he was fired, he had been using his cell 
phone to listen to music. Applicant denied that he was fired for using a cell phone, but 
rather because he had caused yet another delay on the assembly line while shuffling 
music on his phone. In his SOR Answer, he acknowledged that he was “young and 
immature,” and maintained that it was a “turning point” in his attitude towards his 
employment.15 
   
 Applicant attributes his criminal history to “poor choices” that he made in light of 
his tumultuous upbringing, and the lack of good role models and proper guidance. 
Applicant asserted that his daughter motivates him to avoid criminal misconduct. In 
order to give her a “better life” and not have her “see her father in trouble constantly, 
Applicant vowed to keep the following thought in the back of his mind: “You need to not 
do whatever stupid thing you’re about to do for your daughter.” While his daughter does 
not live with him, he calls her every night and provides for her needs.16  
 
Before he began working with the defense contractor sponsoring his clearance, 
he was an assistant manager for a retail chain between June 2013 and February 2015. 
He was entrusted to make substantial bank deposits each day. His employment ended 
when they closed his store. He then began working for the defense contractor and, 
                                                          
13 GE 3. 
 
14 GE 3. 
 
15 See also GE 2 at 11; Tr. at 43-45, 70-72. 
 
16 Tr. at 38, 40-43, 47, 95-96. 
 
 
6 
 
during his six-month probation period, qualified to work on one of their most important 
jobs. After the defense contractor laid him off, the retail chain hired him again as an 
assistant manager. He is currently still employed there and walks two hours every day 
to get himself to the job location.17  
 
Applicant’s friend testified at the hearing. He has known Applicant since middle 
school and been close friends with him since high school. He socializes with Applicant 
at least once a week. He described Applicant as “volatile and prone to anger and 
aggression” until he matured and calmed down when his daughter was born. He opined 
that Applicant was honest, straight-forward, and does not “try and hide behind things.”18  
 
Another close friend, who is the mother of Applicant’s daughter, averred that 
Applicant has grown up into a “fantastic man” and turned his life around during the ten 
years that she has known him. She highly regards his character, honesty, and 
trustworthiness. She explained that he strives to set an example for his daughter of 
honor, strength, and perseverance.19  
 
Applicant’s personal representative, the chief steward for the defense contractor 
sponsoring his clearance, remarked favorably about his work performance. Applicant 
developed the skills of a good welder in months, which usually takes many years. He 
also worked on a crew that is the “cream of the crop” of crews when it comes to 
welders.20   
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”21 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”22 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”23 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 11, 45-47, 96-97. 
 
18 Tr. at 98-106. 
 
19 AE A. 
 
20 Tr. at 6, 117. 
 
21 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
22 Egan at 527. 
 
23 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
7 
 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”24 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.25 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”26 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.27 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.28 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.29 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”30 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”31 
                                                          
24 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
25 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
26 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
27 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
28 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
29 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
30 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
31 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30: Criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal activity between 2011 and 2017 establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own 
would be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which 
in combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but 
not limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant was 20 years old when he vandalized automobiles with his friends, and 
21 when he drove a vehicle on three occasions knowing that his license had been 
suspended. After his daughter was born, at age 24, he drove a vehicle on a suspended 
license; that time, unintentionally. He was also arrested on a warrant for missing, by a 
few days, a $5 payment on an earlier court fine. Arguably, one or more of these 
incidents would lack security significance if viewed in isolation. However, they 
collectively establish a pattern of questionable judgment that also calls into question 
Applicant’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
Nevertheless, he could have demonstrated successful rehabilitation had he maintained 
a clean criminal record after his 2015 charge.  
 
 However, after receiving the SOR, at age 26, Applicant was arrested again; this 
time for more serious charges. The record suggests that he either misinterpreted the 
 
9 
 
situation with his neighbor or lied about his motive for brandishing a realistic looking 
weapon in a manner that triggered fear in his neighbors and the responding police 
officers. Nevertheless, even if he actually believed that a female neighbor’s life was 
being threatened, his actions were poor judgment at the very least, if not criminal as he 
was charged. Based on all the evidence, Applicant has not demonstrated a sufficient 
pattern of modified behavior for me to conclude that the questionable judgment 
associated with his criminal misconduct is behind him. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are not 
established. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline, as set out in AG ¶ 15, includes: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.”  
 
Applicant’s 2010 employment issues establish the following disqualifying 
condition under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 16(d)(2): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . . (2) any 
disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rules violations . . . . 
 
I find Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by the employment 
issues.32 His matured work ethic and the high regard with which subsequent employers 
have had for his work performance sufficiently demonstrate that those issues are not 
likely to recur. Therefore, I find SOR ¶ 2.b in favor of Applicant. 
 
Notwithstanding my adverse determination under Guideline J, Applicant’s 
criminal misconduct also raises concerns under Guideline E. While none of the listed 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline strictly applies to his criminal misconduct, I 
find that it establishes the general concern involving questionable judgment and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, which Applicant has not mitigated.33  
                                                          
32 AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
33 ISCR Case No. 13-01281 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014) ([T]he DCs listed under any of the Guidelines 
are not exclusive [citation omitted]. To the contrary, they are illustrative in nature, and, even when none of 
the DC’s under a particular Guideline can be applied with literal preciseness, it is not improper for a Judge 
to conclude that an applicant’s conduct sets forth concerns under that Guideline). 
 
10 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid and 
sincere in his resolve to make better choices, not only for his daughter but for his career 
objectives. His two close friends observed positive changes in his behavior over the 
past decade. However, the 2017 incident suggests that Applicant has not evolved as 
much as he needs to. I have no doubt that Applicant’s upbringing and peer pressure 
contributed to his misconduct and poor decisions, but they do not mitigate the 
Government’s concerns. Having observed Applicant’s demeanor at the hearing, I found 
his testimony about the 2017 incident to be minimizing and misleading.  
 
 At this point, Applicant has not carried his heavy burden of overcoming the 
questionable judgment raised by his criminal misconduct.34 After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and E, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
Guideline E concerns surrounding his 2010 employment issues, but not the Guideline J 
and E security concerns raised by his criminal misconduct. Accordingly, Applicant has 
not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
34 “Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.”ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 3 
(App. Bd. Aug 8, 2011), citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 
U.S. 905 (1991). 
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
