 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02025 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on October 3, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. After coordinating with the 
parties, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 28, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 6, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 3, and 4 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. The objection to GE 2 was sustained. Applicant testified and 
called a witness, but she did not submit documentary evidence. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. She submitted documents that I 
have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1, 2, 3A through 3D, and 4, and admitted without 
 
2 
 
objection. Department Counsel’s comments on the additional documents is marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 21, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She served on 
active duty in the U.S. military from 1997 until she was honorably discharged in 2005. 
She has associate’s degrees, which were awarded in 2002 and 2012, and a bachelor’s 
degree, which was awarded in 2004. She has never married, and she has no children.1 
 
Applicant was unemployed from about October 2005 through May 2006. She 
worked for a defense contractor from June 2006 through March 2007. In April 2007, she 
and a partner started two real estate businesses. The real estate market collapsed. 
Applicant used her personal credit in an unsuccessful attempt to keep the companies 
afloat. They closed the businesses in 2010. She was advised to file a bankruptcy case, 
but she did not have the money to pay an attorney, and she could not find a job.2 
 
Applicant decided her best option was to attend culinary school with the 
assistance of the GI Bill. After graduating in 2012, she worked several jobs in various 
states with periods of unemployment. She realized the food services industry was not 
stable and did not pay that well, and she moved to another state to work in the defense 
industry in August 2015. She worked as an independent contractor for a subcontractor 
to her current employer before being hired by the parent company in January 2017 as a 
full-time employee.3 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent consumer debts totaling $78,944. Applicant 
admitted all of the allegations. The debts were listed by all three credit reporting 
agencies on the combined credit report from November 2015. All of the debts were 
accrued in the 2000s, and the date of last activity on all of the debts was May 2010 or 
earlier. Four of the debts were reported as charged off, and one was sold to a collection 
company. None of the debts were listed on the March 2017 Equifax credit report 
submitted by the Government or the June 2017 Equifax credit report submitted by 
Applicant.4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
October 2015. She reported her delinquent accounts, which she estimated at $60,000.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15, 37; GE 1.  
 
2 Tr. at 15-19, 25-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1.  
 
3 Tr. at 19-22, 27, 40-41, 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1.  
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE 3A.2.  
 
5 GE 1.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant consulted with an attorney in 2016 about filing bankruptcy. They 
discussed Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 and decided, because of her income, a Chapter 
13 was her only option. Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney testified that he recommended 
that Applicant delay filing the Chapter 13 case until at least July 2017 because of how 
her income would be computed by the bankruptcy court.6 
 
 With the exception of the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s current finances 
are sound. She has not accrued any new delinquent debt since May 2010. She is 
current on four student loans totaling about $20,000, a car loan, and a credit card with a 
$273 balance. There are no other accounts with balances on her most recent credit 
report.7 
 
 Post-hearing, Applicant’s attorney contacted her creditors and learned the debts 
were unenforceable. All of the creditors indicated they had no intention of initiating legal 
action, and all but one stated that they had no interest in Applicant’s debts. The attorney 
realized that there was no reason for Applicant to file bankruptcy. Applicant followed her 
attorney’s advice and did not file a bankruptcy case. She has received financial 
counseling.8  
 
 Applicant is no longer represented by the attorney. She decided to take it upon 
herself to attempt to resolve any of the debts that the creditors would discuss with her. 
She was only successful in contacting one creditor, who asked for payments of $1,000 
per month. She cannot afford that amount. She agreed to make $50 monthly payments, 
or “donations” as the creditor called it, until she can pay the remainder in full. She will 
continue her efforts to make arrangements with the other creditors.9 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 22-25, 29-31, 46-59; AE 2.  
 
7 Tr. at 31-37; GE 4; AE 3A.1, 3A.2.  
 
8 Tr. at 24; AE 2, 3A.1, 3A.2, 3.A.3, 3B, 3B.1, 3C, 3D.  
 
9 AE 4.  
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had financial problems and delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control.  
 
Applicant opened real estate businesses shortly before the real estate market 
collapsed. She used her personal credit in an unsuccessful attempt to keep the 
businesses afloat. The five debts in the SOR were all accrued during this period. She 
was advised after her businesses failed that she should file bankruptcy, but she could 
not afford an attorney. To her credit, despite attending school, moving several times, 
and suffering through periods of unemployment and underemployment, she was able to 
keep all her other accounts current. She has accrued no new delinquent debts since 
2010.  
 
Applicant worked with a bankruptcy attorney since 2016 to figure the best 
resolution of her financial problems. The original plan was to file a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case. Her attorney contacted her creditors and learned the debts were 
unenforceable. The creditors indicated they had no intention of initiating legal action. All 
but one stated that they had no interest in Applicant’s debts. The attorney realized that 
 
6 
 
there was no reason for Applicant to file bankruptcy. A Chapter 13 bankruptcy case 
would likely accomplish little but to take the court’s time. Creditors do not get paid 
unless they file a claim with the court,10 and the creditors do not appear to be inclined to 
press their cases. Applicant has received financial counseling, and her finances are 
otherwise sound.  
 
No longer represented and with bankruptcy not a practical option, Applicant took 
it upon herself to attempt to resolve any of the debts that the creditors would discuss 
with her. She was only successful in contacting one creditor, who asked for payments of 
$1,000 per month. She cannot afford that amount. She agreed to make $50 monthly 
“donations” until she can pay the remainder in full. She will continue her efforts to make 
arrangements with the other creditors. 
 
Applicant does not present a perfect case in mitigation. Delinquent debts are a 
continuing concern until they are resolved. However, at some point, debts become old, 
unenforceable, charged off, fall off credit reports, and no longer of interest even to the 
creditors. Despite all those factors, Applicant still wants to resolve her debts and is 
willing to resort to “donations” instead of payments. Her financial decisions no longer 
reflect questionable reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Her financial problems are 
resolved or being resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
                                                          
10 http://www.uscourts.gov/services-forms/bankruptcy/bankruptcy-basics/chapter-13-bankruptcy-basics. 
 
 
7 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
