 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03284 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated September 24, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 29, 2016. On January 13, 2017, he 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on March 7, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on September 19, 2016.  A Notice of Hearing was 
issued on February 21, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 14, 2017. 
 
 During the hearing, one Government exhibit (GE) 1 and one Applicant exhibit (AE) 
A were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on June 30, 2017. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement 
it. He took advantage of that opportunity and timely submitted several documents, which 
were marked and admitted as AE B through AE L, without objection. The record closed 
on July 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, without comments, the sole factual 
allegation pertaining to financial considerations (¶ 1.a.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admission 
is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a senior 
electrician or facilities maintenance electrician with the company or previous contractors 
on the same contract, at an overseas location, since October 2010. He previously held a 
position with another employer as an electrician from May 2000 until September 2008. 
He was unemployed from September 2008 until October 2010. He is a June 1980 high 
school graduate, and he has a trade certificate, received in June 1981. Applicant served 
briefly in the U.S. Coast Guard inactive reserve from September 1981 until November 
1981. He was granted a secret security clearance in August 2005. Applicant was married 
in December 2007. He has a stepdaughter (born in 1979) and one stepson (born in 1980).  
 
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously issued 
national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations3 
It is unclear what Applicant’s personal finances were like before they deteriorated. 
His wife owned a trucking business for eight years and they owned 11 acres of vacant 
real estate upon which they intended to operate a hotel for horses traveling between 
various regions during certain seasons. Unfortunately, he ran out of funds sufficient to 
start the project. As noted above, Applicant was unemployed for an extensive period, 
commencing in September 2008 – during a period when the national economy was in 
distress. His employer, at the time, had been established to work on a specific contract, 
and when that contract ended, the employer company was dissolved, and Applicant was 
laid off. Applicant’s annual salary during the last year before he was laid off was $78,000. 
It plummeted to $14,300. He did the best he could to keep his house afloat, but he could 
not afford to pay his county property taxes for the vacant property after he was laid off. 
After he obtained his new position, Applicant approached the county tax collector 
to explore a possible resolution, but his efforts were repeatedly rebuffed when the county 
demanded that he make a lump-sum payment of the entire outstanding balance. He had 
insufficient funds to do so. The delinquencies continued to increase each year. In about 
2011, Applicant’s mother called him seeking financial assistance because, although she 
was receiving Social Security, she had no money to pay her bills. She had run up $35,000 
in credit card debt. As a result, much of what Applicant was earning was diverted from a 
possible resolution of his delinquent property taxes to pay off his mother’s debts. In an 
effort to resolve his taxes, Applicant put the property up for sale on three separate 
occasions. There was no interest and there were no offers. Applicant stated that the 
county obtained a judgment for the delinquent taxes in 2013 or 2014, but there is no 
documentary evidence to support that statement. The county revenue division bill history 
does not reflect anything about a judgment.4 Applicant candidly acknowledged having 
some property tax difficulties with the county when he completed his e-QIP. 
On March 8, 2017, Applicant obtained a $32,000 bank personal loan to pay off the 
delinquent property taxes.5 He is expected to make 84 fixed monthly payments of $737.35 
unless the loan is paid off before then. On March 17, 2017, Applicant paid the county 
revenue division $34,937.47 in the following amounts for each of the delinquent tax years: 
$6,730.56 (2008); $5,814.39 (2009); $4,932.70 (2010); $4,424.43 (2011); $3,918.48 
(2012); $3,661.78 (2013); $2,579.99 (2014); $1,613.63 (2015); and $1,261.51 (2016).6 
The debts have been resolved. Applicant’s property tax bill for 2017 is not due until 
October 2017.  
                                                          
3 General source information pertaining to the financial issues discussed below can be found in GE 1, supra 
note 1.  
 
4 AE A (Bill History, dated June 22, 2017). 
 
5 AE F (Truth-In-Lending Disclosures, dated March 8, 2017); AE B (e-mail, dated July 12, 2017). 
 
6 AE A, supra note 4. 
 
4 
                                      
 
On June 12, 2017, Applicant and a purchaser signed a vacant land sales contract 
with an intended settlement date on June 23, 2017. The agreed sales price was $65,000.7 
It was Applicant’s intention to use the proceeds from the sale to pay off the loan and put 
the remainder into his 401(k). Unfortunately, without any notice, the would-be purchaser 
failed to appear at the closing and chose to withdraw his offer. The sale failed to go 
through.8 Nevertheless, Applicant has taken positive steps to resolve his only delinquent 
account. 
In 2016, Applicant’s salary increased to $52,000, and the anticipated amount for 
2017 is about $54,000. He is eligible for both salary and overtime pay, and he generally 
receives biweekly checks for $1,450. After a year and one-half of unemployment, for the 
past year, Applicant’s wife has been employed as a pool cleaner, earning $240 per week. 
Applicant has no other delinquencies, and his current credit score is 735. Although I had 
requested that Applicant submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his monthly 
income; monthly expenses; or any monthly remainder that might be available for 
discretionary spending or savings, he failed to do so. There is no evidence of Applicant 
having received financial counseling.  His finances are under control. 
Character References 
 The physical security manager for Applicant’s employer has known Applicant for 
approximately 13 years. He characterized Applicant as honest, trustworthy, well 
respected, and a good worker who possesses an outstanding work ethic and skillset.9 
The electrical shop supervisor opined that Applicant is an honest, hardworking and 
capable employee who is willing to help others and respect their opinions.10 A colleague 
who has worked with Applicant for seven years, and two neighbors who have known him 
for over a decade, all note how helpful he is in lending a hand in repairs and remodeling, 
and they consider him to be trustworthy, intelligent, responsible, caring, and 
responsible.11 Applicant’s sister-in-law described Applicant as a good person who is 
always kind and generous with others. He has a strong sense of duty, and he possesses 
a great deal of integrity.12 
  
                                                          
7 AE E (Vacant Land Contract, dated June 12, 2017); AE C (Certificate of Authenticity, dated June 12, 2017); 
AE D (Settlement Statement (HUD-1), undated). 
 
8 AE B, supra note 5. 
 
9 AE I (Character Reference, dated July 6, 2017). 
 
10 AE H (Character Reference, dated June 29, 2017). 
 
11 AE G (Character Reference, undated); AE J (Character Reference, undated); and AE K (Character 
Reference, undated). 
 
12 AE L (Character Reference, dated June 25, 2017). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”13 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”14   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”15 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.16  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
13 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
14 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
15 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”17  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”18 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 
19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, ¶ 19(b) may 
apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.” 
                                                          
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Similarly, under ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. “Consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other negative financial indicators” 
may raise concerns under ¶ 19(e). In addition, under ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently 
filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax as required” may raise concerns. Applicant failed to pay county 
property taxes for several years, but his actions had nothing to do with income taxes. ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) apply. ¶¶ 19(b), 19e), and 19(f) do not apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under ¶ 20(b), 
financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received or is 
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under ¶ 20(c). Similarly, ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”19 In addition, ¶ 20(e) 
may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
In those instances where “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements,” 
¶ 20(g), may apply. 
I have concluded that ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(g) apply, and ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. In September 2008, Applicant was laid off and he remained unemployed 
for an extensive period, factors that were largely beyond his control. He did the best he 
                                                          
19 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
could to keep his house afloat, but he could not afford to pay his county property taxes 
for the vacant property after he was laid off. Applicant did not ignore his financial situation, 
and he did not dispute his tax delinquencies. After he obtained his new position, in a good-
faith effort to resolve the property tax delinquencies, Applicant approached the county tax 
collector, but his efforts were repeatedly rebuffed when the county demanded that he 
make a lump-sum payment of the entire outstanding balance. He had insufficient funds 
to do so. The delinquencies continued to increase each year. In about 2011, Applicant 
diverted funds from a possible resolution of his delinquent property taxes to pay off his 
mother’s debts. In an effort to resolve his taxes, Applicant put the property up for sale on 
three separate occasions. There was no interest and there were no offers. On March 8, 
2017, Applicant obtained a $32,000 bank personal loan to pay off the delinquent property 
taxes. On March 17, 2017, Applicant paid the county revenue division $34,937.47. An 
anticipated sale of the property in June 2017 fell through at the last moment. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. 
  
Applicant has no other delinquencies, and his current credit score is 735. There is 
evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. When confronted 
with the issues that caused his financial problems, Applicant acted responsibly by 
repeatedly attempting to work with the county and by trying to sell the property.20 
Applicant’s actions under the circumstances no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.21 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
                                                          
20 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
21 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.22   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant failed to 
timely pay his county property taxes for the tax years 2008 through 2016.   
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or 
mishandling protected information. Applicant candidly acknowledged having some 
property tax difficulties with the county when he completed his e-QIP. Applicant owned 
some vacant real estate upon which he intended to operate a hotel for horses traveling 
between various regions during certain seasons. Unfortunately, he ran out of funds 
sufficient to start the project when he became unemployed for an extensive period. He 
did the best he could to keep his house afloat, but he could not afford to pay his county 
property taxes for the vacant property after he was laid off. On March 17, 2017, Applicant 
paid the county revenue division $34,937.47, resolving the entire delinquent balance.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:23 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
                                                          
22 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
23 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a positive track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts. His efforts were initially hindered by his lengthy period of 
unemployment. Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG ¶ 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
