 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00806 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations and 
alcohol consumption. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 14, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On August 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated January 14, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 11, 2016. On October 28, 2016, he 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on March 9, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2017.  A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on May 3, 2017. However, pursuant to ¶ E.3.1.13 of the Directive, on May 11, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an Amendment to the SOR to 
him. The Amendment to the SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). It is unclear when Applicant received the Amendment to the SOR as there 
is no receipt in the case file. On June 14, he responded to the Amendment to the SOR. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on June 22, 2017. 
 
 During the hearing, 7 Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 7, 2 Administrative 
exhibits, and 19 Applicant exhibits (AE) A through AE S were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received 
on July 6, 2017. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took 
advantage of that opportunity and timely submitted several documents, which were 
marked and admitted as AE T through AE X, without objection.3 The record closed on 
July 17, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SORs, Applicant denied, with comments, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) of the SOR, as well 
as the one allegation pertaining to alcohol consumption (¶ 2.a.) of the Amendment to the 
SOR. Applicant’s comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a senior 
SharePoint developer with the company since August 2014. He previously held similar 
positions with other employers since 2002. He is a May 1995 high school graduate, and 
he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in computer science in 2001. Applicant has never 
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously issued 
national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 Because of an apparent miscommunication in Applicant’s attorney’s office, some AEs were marked and 
admitted at the hearing, but other AEs were subsequently marked by Applicant’s attorney’s office using the same letter 
designations. In this regard, to avoid remarking each AE, I have merely remarked certain AEs and placed them with 
the AEs formally marked by Applicant’s attorney. I noted below each such remarking. 
 
3 
                                      
 
served in the U.S. military. He was granted a secret security clearance in August 2002. 
Applicant has never been married. He has no children.  
 
Financial Considerations4 
On August 14, 2009, Applicant gave a General Durable Power of Attorney to his 
older sister to manage his financial affairs during his anticipated long-term assignments 
to overseas locations.5 His overseas assignments from about 2008 until 2016 took him to 
hazardous war zones in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as to Korea, the Philippines, and 
Japan on multiple occasions, generally for lengthy periods, sometimes exceeding 12 
months at a time.6 He returned from his last overseas assignment in May 2016. During 
his periods of deployment, Applicant was earning up to $300,000 per year, and he was 
sending home $2,500 per month to cover the medical expenses for various family 
members. In late 2012 or early 2013, he briefly returned home to assist his bedridden 
grandmother with 24-hour live-in assistance. After his father passed away, he assisted 
his mother (and his disabled brother) financially to maintain her home. At about that same 
time, he experienced unspecified and unforeseen financial difficulties due to a failed 
upstart online business that basically wiped out his savings.7 In early 2015, Applicant 
learned that his sister had not been properly managing his finances, having been 
overwhelmed by her dual responsibilities of caring for her family members and managing 
his finances. He contacted his sister and his creditors to find out what had happened, but 
did little follow-up throughout the remainder of 2015 to resolve the issues. He returned to 
Afghanistan in January 2016, trusting that everything would be taken care of, but nothing 
changed. Upon returning to the United States in May 2016, Applicant took over control of 
his finances from his sister. 
The SOR identified five purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed for 
collection or charged off, as generally reflected by Applicant’s January 2015 credit report 
or his February 2016 credit report. Those debts total approximately $12,811. The current 
status of the five accounts, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by 
the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, is that four of 
the debts have been resolved by settlements and payments, and the fifth debt was 
successfully disputed and has been removed from his credit report. The debts are as 
follows. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This refers to a bank credit card with a past-due and unpaid balance 
of $4,222.17 that was placed for collection, charged off, and sold to a debt purchaser. 
Applicant submitted a dispute to the credit reporting agency that was not upheld. In 
                                                          
4 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 1, supra note 1; GE 2 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated January 27, 
2015); GE 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated February 18, 2016); and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated October 28, 
2016.  
 
5 AE V (General Durable Power of Attorney, dated August 14, 2009). 
 
6 AE D (Resume, undated); AE X (List of Residences – Last 10 years, undated). 
 
7 GE 1, supra note 1, at 51-54; AE B (Biography, undated); Tr. at 95-98. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
October 2016, Applicant reached out to the debt purchaser and they agreed to a 
settlement of $2,771.91 to be divided into three payments each of $923.97, commencing 
in October 2016 and ending in December 2016.8 Applicant made the agreed payments, 
and the balance remaining is zero.9 The account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This refers to a bank credit card with a past-due and unpaid balance 
of $4,219 that was placed for collection and charged off. In October 2016, Applicant 
reached out to the creditor and they agreed to a settlement of $2,110 to be divided into 
two lump-sum payments, commencing in October 2016 and ending in November 2016.10 
Applicant made the agreed payments, and the balance remaining is zero.11 The account 
has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This refers to a cellular telephone account with a past-due and unpaid 
balance of $2,354.05 that was placed for collection and sold, in turn, to two debt 
purchasers. At some point either in or before October 2016, Applicant reached out to the 
latest debt purchaser in an effort to resolve the account, but because the account 
information was not yet in that debt purchaser’s system, he was advised to call back in 
the future.12 In January 2017, the debt purchaser was finally prepared to proceed, and it 
offered to settle the account for $1,177.05. Applicant made his last agreed payment in 
April 2017, and the balance remaining is zero.13 The account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This refers to an unspecified type of bank account with an unpaid 
balance of $459 that was placed for collection.14 Applicant reached out to the creditor, but 
it had no records of any such account.15 He then disputed the account with the credit 
reporting agencies, and the account was eventually removed from his subsequent credit 
reports.16 Although Applicant indicated he would furnish documents associated with the 
disputes, he failed to do so. In the absence of such documentation, it is unclear if the 
account has been resolved. Nevertheless, considering the amount in issue, this account 
has minimal security significance. 
                                                          
8 GE 2, supra note 4, at 5; GE 3, supra note 4, at 1; AE E (Letter, dated October 25, 2016); AE O (Experian 
Credit Report, dated June 8, 2017), at 17. 
 
9 AE K (Preauthorized Debit, dated October 30, 2016); AE E (formerly AE T)(Letter, dated June 3, 2017). 
 
10 GE 2, supra note 4, at 6; GE 3, supra note 4, at 2; AE L (Letter, dated October 31, 2016). 
 
11 AE L (Preauthorized Debits, various dates); AE L (formerly AE U)(Letter, dated June 9, 2017). 
 
12 GE 2, supra note 4, at 9; GE 3, supra note 4, at 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 4, at 1-2. 
 
13 AE M (Letter, dated January 24, 2017); AE M (formerly AE V)(Letter, dated June 2, 2017); AE M 
(Preauthorized Debit, dated February 1, 2017). 
 
14 GE 3, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
15 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 3, at 1-2; Tr. at 36. 
 
16 Tr. at 38; See AE G (Equifax Credit Report, dated September 19, 2016); AE O, supra note 8. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.e.): This refers to Applicant’s failure to pay $1,380 in state income tax 
for the tax year 2012 – a year in which he was overseas in Iraq and the Philippines. His 
home of record is a state without an income tax, but the state in which his family resided 
was an income tax state, and it erroneously reflected Applicant as a resident. Applicant’s 
sister failed to pay the required tax. The unpaid balance was increased with penalty, 
interest, and court costs to $1,557.75, and a tax lien was filed in April 2015.17 In October 
2016, rather than fighting with the state, Applicant paid the outstanding balance, and the 
tax lien was expunged.18 The account has been resolved. 
Applicant completed financial counseling in October 2016.19 On July 6, 2017, 
Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his monthly income; 
monthly expenses; or any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary 
spending or savings. His net monthly income is $6,155.30, and his monthly expenses are 
$1,420, leaving a monthly remainder of $4,735.30.20 Applicant has no other delinquent 
accounts. Because Applicant has taken positive steps to reassert himself in controlling 
his finances and resolve all of his accounts, his finances are now under control. 
Alcohol Consumption 
 As noted above, Applicant spent significant time overseas, and while he was in 
Iraq and Afghanistan – dry countries where alcohol is frowned upon or banned – he rarely 
consumed alcohol. He returned relatively briefly to the United States in December 2016, 
and in January 2017, he and some friends decided to go out to celebrate. He initially 
intended to go to a yard party, so he picked up a six-pack of beer. He consumed two 
beers. His plans were changed when some friends asked him to join them at a bar 
downtown. He put the empty beer bottles into the six-pack container in the back seat of 
his automobile. He met his friends, and over a several hour period, he consumed another 
two beers. When he finally departed the bar, he did not consider himself to be intoxicated. 
Shortly after leaving the bar, at about 2:30 a.m., on January 28, 2017, Applicant was 
stopped by a highway patrol trooper for what was called a “welfare stop” because 
Applicant’s vehicle had been observed leaving its lane on several instances. The trooper 
approached the vehicle and “observed several signs of impairment,” not otherwise 
described. Applicant consented to field sobriety tests – which Applicant felt he did well on 
– but the trooper said Applicant had “performed poorly.” It is unclear from the trooper’s 
characterization if “poorly” equates to “failed” or to some other standard. Applicant refused 
to submit to a breathalyzer test. He was arrested and charged with driving under the 
                                                          
17 GE 3, supra note 4, at 3 
 
18 AE N (Tax Lien Expungement, dated October 13, 2016); AE H (Letter, undated). 
 
19 AE F (Certificate of Counseling, dated October 18, 2016). 
 
20 AE T (Personal Financial Statement, dated July 6, 2017). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
influence (DUI), a first degree misdemeanor;21 and open container of alcohol in motor 
vehicle, an infraction.22 No court hearing has yet been held. 
There is no evidence that Applicant was ever required to attend alcohol-related 
counseling or therapy, or that he ever received a diagnosis or prognosis for any alcohol-
related issues. Nevertheless, on his own initiative, on April 9, 2017, Applicant enrolled in, 
and successfully completed, the level 1 curriculum of substance abuse and driving 
education, a 12-hour course of instruction on the adverse effects of chemical use on 
driving ability.23 On May 27, 2017, he successfully completed the assigned number of 
DUI/Substance Abuse treatment hours.24  
Applicant contends that since his arrest, he has abstained from the consumption 
of alcohol. On May 19, 2017, he voluntarily submitted a blood specimen for 
Phosphatidylethanol (PEth) Testing performed by liquid chromatography with tandem 
mass spectrometry. PEth testing provides a detection period of up to three or four weeks. 
Applicant’s analysis did not detect any alcohol in his body.25  
Character References 
 A former coworker who has known Applicant for 18 years does not hesitate to 
recommend Applicant for a security clearance. Applicant often takes assignments that 
are hard to fill in areas that are less desirable to most people in his profession. He gives 
one hundred percent to anything that he does. He has always been reliable and can be 
counted on. Applicant’s coworker-friend-roommate has known him on a daily basis for 
over two years. Applicant is trustworthy, reliable, and level-headed. He is dedicated to the 
mission. A former loan officer at a financial institution that has financed loans for Applicant 
during the over 30 years that she has known him, described Applicant as hardworking, 
very dependable, trustworthy, and honest. She was aware when he financially assisted 
his family.26 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
                                                          
21 GE 5 (Criminal Report Affidavit and DUI Uniform Traffic Citation, dated January 28, 2017); GE 4 (Case 
Summary, dated May 11, 2017). 
 
22 GE 7 (Uniform Traffic Citation, dated January 28, 2017); GE 6 (Case Summary, dated May 11, 2017). 
 
23 AE Q (Certificate of Successful Completion, dated March 14, 2017). 
 
24 AE P (Certificate of Completion, dated May 27, 2017); AE R (DUI Class Receipts, various dates). 
 
25 AE S (Patient Report, dated May 26, 2017). 
 
26 AE A (Character References, various dates); Tr. at 29-31. 
 
27 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
                                                          
28 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
29 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
30 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”31  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 
19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, ¶ 19(b) may 
apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.” 
Similarly, under ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. “Consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other negative financial indicators” 
may raise concerns under ¶ 19(e). In addition, under ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently 
filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, 
                                                          
31 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
32 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
state, or local income tax as required” may raise concerns. Applicant failed to pay state 
income tax for the tax year 2012, and a lien was filed; and four accounts were placed for 
collection or charged off. ¶¶ 19(c), 19(e), and 19(f) apply. ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) do not apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under ¶ 20(b), 
financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received or is 
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under ¶ 20(c). Similarly, ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”33 In addition, ¶ 20(e) 
may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
In those instances where “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements,” 
¶ 20(g), may apply. 
 
I have concluded that ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(g) apply, and ¶ 20(e) 
minimally applies. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” His 
financial situation was caused by his sister’s failure to manage his financial affairs, 
especially while he was overseas, and her failure was largely beyond Applicant’s control. 
Contrary to Department Counsel’s arguments that Applicant could have taken more timely 
action to resolve his debts, the fact is that Applicant was generally overseas – for lengthy 
periods in the war zones of Iraq and Afghanistan - with somewhat limited access to 
necessary documentation, communication, or free time to do so. Applicant did not ignore 
                                                          
33 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
his financial situation. Upon returning to the United States in May 2016, Applicant took 
control of his finances from his sister, and sought guidance. He contacted his creditors, 
disputed one account that was later removed from his credit reports, and he established 
repayment agreements and paid the agreed balances. He paid off his state income taxes 
rather than disputing the state’s records. He has no other delinquent debts. 
  
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time.  
 
It is clear that Applicant now has funds remaining at the end of each month for 
discretionary use or savings, and there is evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. When confronted with the issues that caused his financial 
problems, Applicant acted responsibly by seeking information from his sister, and he 
approached the creditors or collection agents.34 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.35 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness.” 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under ¶ 
22(a) “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol use or whether the 
individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder,” is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly, under ¶ 22(b), “alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or 
duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the welfare 
and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use 
                                                          
34 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
35 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
disorder,” may raise security concerns. In addition, under ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder,” is potentially disqualifying. Under ¶ 
22(d), a “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social worker) of alcohol 
use disorder,” may raise security concerns. If there is “the failure to follow treatment 
advice once diagnosed,” ¶ 22(e) may be of significance. ¶ 22(f) is potentially disqualifying 
if there is “alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder.” The “failure to follow any 
court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment, or abstinence,” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI, a misdemeanor, and 
open container of alcohol in motor vehicle, an infraction. No court hearing has yet been 
held. ¶ 22(a) applies. None of the other disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated if “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment.” Also, under ¶ 
23(b), it is potentially mitigating if “the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of 
maladaptive alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations.” Where “the individual is 
participating in counseling or a treatment program, has no previous history of treatment 
and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress in a treatment program,” ¶ 23(c) may 
arise. In addition, ¶ 23(d) may apply where “the individual has successfully completed a 
treatment program along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.” 
 
I have concluded that ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), 23(c), and 23(d) all partially apply. There is 
no evidence: (a) that Applicant ever appeared intoxicated or impaired at work; (b) of any 
alcohol-related diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional; (c) of 
any required alcohol-related treatment requirements; or (d) of a previous history of 
maladaptive alcohol use. The only alcohol-related incident involving police authorities or 
judicial authorities was the one in January 2017. Although the evidence is clear that 
Applicant was arrested and charged as set forth above, there are certain aspects of the 
facts leading up to the charges that are open to interpretation. There is no description as 
to the “several signs of impairment” found by the arresting trooper. There is no mention 
in the incident report of any odor of alcohol being detected, or red eyes, flushed face, 
slurred speech, or unsteady gait. While Applicant’s performance in the field sobriety tests 
was described as “poorly,” there is no indication that Applicant actually failed the tests. In 
the absence of such factors, it is easy to conclude that the signs of impairment were 
merely the three mentioned in the report: alcohol containers in the back seat, the vehicle 
leaving its lane on several instances, and a poor sobriety test performance. While that 
incident is relatively recent, as the only such incident, it does not establish a pattern of 
maladaptive alcohol use. To Applicant’s credit, he became pro-active when he was 
 
12 
                                      
 
confronted with his current alcohol-related situation. He successfully completed two 
different alcohol-related education courses. He abstained from any further alcohol 
consumption. To emphasize and prove his abstinence, Applicant went through the PEth 
protocol. Applicant’s consumption of alcohol over the past decade has apparently been 
minimal at most. Since the incident, he has abstained. Under the circumstances, based 
on the available evidence, I conclude that this incident is aberrant behavior that is 
inconsistent with Applicant’s normal conduct, and it does not cast doubt of Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.36   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant failed to 
pay his state income tax for the tax year 2012, and a lien was filed; and four accounts 
were placed for collection or charged off. He was arrested and charged with DUI and open 
container of alcohol in a motor vehicle in January 2017. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or 
mishandling protected information. Applicant is a well-respected individual who often 
takes assignments that are hard to fill in areas that are less desirable to most people in 
his profession – like combat zones in Iraq and Afghanistan. His colleagues and friends 
consider him to be trustworthy, reliable, and honest. His financial situation was caused by 
his sister’s failure to manage – under a power of attorney - his finances, especially while 
he was serving overseas. He eventually took control of his finances and resolved the 
                                                          
36 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
delinquent accounts, either by payments or, in one instance, by a successful dispute. 
Applicant has no other delinquent accounts. He has a substantial monthly remainder, and 
his financial situation is under control. The incident involving alcohol appears to be 
aberrant conduct in that Applicant’s consumption of alcohol over a decade has been 
minimal at most, and it is not indicative of the true Applicant. There is no evidence of a 
continuing or current alcohol problem.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:37 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a positive track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts. Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and his alcohol consumption. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 
¶ 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e:  For Applicant 
    
                                                          
37 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
