 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 17-00183 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 2, 2016. 
On March 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 7, 2017, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations except for the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d, which he denied stating it was paid in 
full. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on April 13, 2017. The case was assigned to me on May 
2, 2017. On May 19, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for June 21, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant presented testimony from his wife, and he testified 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2017. At the hearing, 
department counsel moved to amend the SOR by deleting the date “2012” from the 
allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.d and inserting the date “2009” in its place, in reference 
to the tax year in question. This motion was granted. It did not alter Applicant’s denial of 
this allegation.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He graduated from high school in 1984. Applicant was  
employed as a carpenter by a federal contractor intermittently since January 1997. He 
lost his full-time job as a carpenter in 2000, and became a self-employed carpenter after 
that. He worked only sporadically from 2000 to present. He reported no military service 
and he has been married since 1994. Applicant has two children, ages 20, and 22. One 
graduated college and the other is currently attending college. Applicant attended 
college for a few years and obtained a certificate in 1992. He reports no previous 
security clearances. He reported no delinquent debts or financial problems in section 26 
of his February 2016 SCA. 
 
The SOR alleged five delinquent debts totaling approximately $25,000, including 
student loans and taxes owed to a state. The SOR alleged in ¶ 1.a that Applicant is 
indebted to the Department of Education for a delinquent student loan in the 
approximate amount of $18,134. Applicant admitted this allegation in his Answer to the 
SOR and stated “I am making regular payments on this account.” At the hearing, 
Applicant testified that this and the debt in SOR 1.e are two separate student loans that 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s February 2, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on March 23, 
2016.  
 
 
3 
 
 
he consolidated for payments of $143 each month as indicated in AE A.3 He produced 
evidence in AE A that he was making consistent payments to a collection agency for the 
creditor in the amount of $143 a month. The schedule of payments submitted as AE A 
reflects that these consolidated student loans should be completely paid off in 2020. 
Additionally, bank statements admitted as AE B, corroborated Applicant’s testimony that 
he has been consistently making these payments on this student loan for several 
months before the hearing including April, May and June 2017.  
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.b that Applicant is indebted to a creditor on a delinquent 
credit card account placed for collection in the amount of $590. Applicant admitted this 
allegation in his Answer to the SOR and stated “I am currently arranging to repay this 
and this should be resolved shortly.” At the hearing, he produced evidence in the form 
of a letter from a law firm that represents the creditor at AE C, confirming payment to 
resolve this debt of $589. This corroborated Applicant’s wife’s testimony that he has 
now paid this debt off.4 She also testified that she was the primary breadwinner in the 
family of four, all living together. She handled the family finances.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is a delinquent debt for a charged-off account in the approximate 
amount of $370 from a cable company.  Applicant testified that he forgot to turn in the 
cable equipment because that company never sent a box as promised. He has since 
turned in the equipment and paid this off.5 Applicant produced an April 2017 bank 
statement at the hearing at AE D to show that he paid $370 to the creditor to resolve 
this delinquent debt.6 It has been resolved.  
 
SOR (as amended) ¶ 1.d alleged delinquent taxes owed to a state in the amount 
of $2,802 for tax year 2009. Applicant denied this debt in his Answer to the SOR, 
claiming it was paid in full. Applicant’s wife testified at the hearing that this tax lien was 
actually paid in full in 2012 when her pay was attached,7 well before the SOR issued, 
but not released by the state until recently. Correspondence was admitted as AE E 
showing her correspondence with the state. It has been resolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e is another student loan account placed for collection by the 
Department of Education in the amount of $3,263. Applicant admitted this in his Answer 
to the SOR and stated “I am making regular payments on this account, which is related 
to the debt alleged at subparagraph a above.” This student loan was consolidated with 
the aforementioned student loan and Applicant submitted exhibits AE A and AE B 
showing consistent payments of $143 a month to settle these.  
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 29, 38. 
 
4 Tr. at 30. 
 
5 Tr. at 60. 
 
6 AE D, and Tr. at 60,61. 
 
7 Tr. at 24. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant needs a security clearance for his carpenter job. Applicant’s monthly 
take-home pay is presently $487 a week in unemployment compensation.8 His wife 
testified that she earns $83,000 a year, plus possible bonuses.9 He expects to have the 
two consolidated student loans paid off completely by 2020. They have the means to do 
so, and they are making payments on a plan. The other three SOR allegations have 
been resolved. He testified that he worked for a federal contractor for ten months before 
his interim security clearance was revoked and Applicant was laid off in March 2017.10 
Applicant testified credibly that his debts arose from sporadic employment and he loves 
his job and wants to return to full time employment. Applicant’s direct supervisor 
provided a letter of recommendation that was admitted as AE F, and it attests to his 
work ethic, ability and honesty.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 52. 
 
9 Tr. at 22. 
 
10 Tr. at 12. 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds…  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;    
 
6 
 
 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state or local income tax  
           returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c) 
and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.11 Applicant has met that burden. Most of the delinquent 
debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
                                                          
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant was laid off from full-time employment in 2000. Since then, he has 
been self-employed and sporadically works as a carpenter. Arguably, these conditions 
were beyond his control. He has now produced relevant and responsive documentation, 
demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has met his 
burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under 
control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. He has either paid off, or has made consistent payments pursuant to a plan, most 
of his delinquent debts. Through counsel, he produced letters and bank statements to 
confirm that three out of the five delinquencies alleged in his SOR have been 
completely resolved. The other two (consolidated student loans) are being resolved by 
consistent monthly payments pursuant to a plan. The mitigating conditions enumerated 
above apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant has been married for 23 years, 
put one child through college, and has a second attending college. He has struggled to 
stay employed consistently, and his supervisor holds Applicant in the highest regard. 
Applicant and his wife testified credibly and persuasively that their finances are now 
under control. Most important, Applicant has addressed the specific allegations in the 
SOR and taken affirmative measures to resolve them. He has met his burden of 
production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He is 
 
8 
 
 
gainfully employed and managing his financial affairs. The record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:             FOR Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
