 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09116 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR with an undated response, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 1, 2009. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, and it was received on December 10, 2010. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on May 
19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied ¶¶ 1.c, 1.k , 2.c, and 2.e - 2.g, and 
admitted the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. She is currently married, but separated and has four 
children. She is the primary support for her children, although she does receive $822 
per month from her estranged husband for child and spousal support. Since 2008, she 
has worked for a defense contractor.1 In response to government interrogatories, 
Applicant stated her financial difficulties occurred because the Army relocated her 
husband to a new post in 2007 and she could not find work in their new location for 
about seven months. However, when she became employed her new position paid 
considerably less than what she had been earning ($7.50 per hour compared to $18 per 
hour). The Applicant claims most of her debts became delinquent during her periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. Several debts do, however, predate her 
unemployment/underemployment period of 2007-2008 (SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.q).2   
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by three credit reports dated July 21, 
2009, May 3, 2008, and April 29, 2008.3 The total debt alleged in the SOR is 
approximately $40,000. Applicant denied two of the seventeen debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.k). The first is a collection debt for a cable provider. Applicant fails to provide proof of 
payment for this debt, but she asserts that she still has this cable service. For the 
second debt, she does provide documentation showing the account has a zero 
balance.4 Applicant admitted the remainder of the debts and failed to show proof of 
payment on any of the debts. She submitted a proposed payment plan with a debt 
consolidation service that would cover approximately $4,800 of her existing debt, but 
there was no evidence to support that she actually executed such a plan.5 
  
                                                          
1 Items 5, 6. 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Items 7-9. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
5 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s current financial picture shows that her net income ($4,091 per 
month) exceeds her net expenses ($3,050 per month) by about $1,000 per month. 
However, there is no evidence showing that she applies any of this discretionary 
amount to her debts.6 Applicant stated that she has been getting financial advice, but 
other than mentioning the debt consolidation service, she did not specifically say who or 
what organization was providing that advice.7  
 
 The personal conduct concerns arise out of Applicant’s four arrests in July 1996, 
June 2002, November 2002, and February 2008 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.d).  Those arrests 
include: interfering with an emergency call in February 2008 (sentenced to probation); 
two arrests for assault in November and June 2002, both incidents were investigated 
and reported by the Fort Hood, Texas, Provost Marshal’s Office (no charges filed in 
either case); and, a misdemeanor fraudulent check charge in July 1996 (charges filed, 
but no information regarding disposition). The evidence in the record establishes these 
arrests, including the one disputed by Applicant (she disputed one of the 2002 arrests, 
although she could not say which one).8 The remaining personal conduct allegations 
concern whether Applicant falsified answers to security clearance applications (SF-86) 
on April 16, 2008, and August 6, 1997, and on an enlistment eligibility questionnaire on 
August 6, 1997 (SOR ¶¶ 2.e – 2.g). In all three instances Applicant was asked about 
prior arrests. In answering the April 16, 2008, SF-86, although she did list her most 
recent arrest for interfering with an emergency call, she failed to list her two arrests for 
assault on November 11, 2002 and June 8, 2002.9 Likewise, when she completed her 
August 6, 1997, SF-86 and her enlistment questionnaire on the same date, she failed to 
list her arrest for fraudulent checks from July 31, 1996.10 Applicant claims that she did 
not deliberately falsify these various forms, but instead simply forgot about the arrests at 
the time she completed the forms.11 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 Item 6. 
 
7 Item 4. 
 
8 Items 10-12. 
 
9 Items  5,11-12. 
 
10 Items 5, 13-14. 
 
11 Item 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has approximately $40,000 in delinquent debt that remains unpaid or 
unresolved. I find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Except for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k, Applicant did not provide evidence that she 
paid or resolved any of her delinquent debts. Therefore, her behavior is recent and the 
delinquent debts remain a concern. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
because Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. Applicant provided some information that 
 
6 
 
 
she experienced periods of unemployment/underemployment and is going through a 
separation/divorce from her husband. However, I am unable to determine that her 
financial problems were beyond her control, particularly since several of the debts 
occurred before her employment and domestic problems occurred, or that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is some 
evidence Applicant contacted a debt consolidation service for some of her debt, but 
there is no evidence to show that she executed any agreement with the service or that 
the debts are otherwise being resolved. There is no clear evidence that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or under control. Other than showing that the debt 
listed at SOR ¶ 1.k has a zero balance, she did not provide evidence that she has made 
a good-faith effort to pay her delinquent debts or has attempted to resolve them. I find 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR debts ¶ 1.k, but not to the remainder of the SOR debts. 
Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, but did not provide any proof to show she 
paid the debt or resolved it. She argues that since she currently has service from this 
cable provider, then she must be current on obligations to them. I do not find this 
argument convincing. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire; and 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
Between 1996 and February 2008, Applicant was arrested four times for writing 
fraudulent checks, committing two assaults, and interfering with an emergency call. As a 
whole, these four criminal-related actions call into question Applicant’s judgment. AG ¶ 
16(c) applies to SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.d. In August 1997, Applicant completed an SF-86 and 
 
7 
 
 
an enlistment document that asked her about prior arrests. She was charged with a 
misdemeanor for writing fraudulent checks on July 31, 2006, just one year prior to the 
date she filled out the two respective forms. I find Applicant’s excuse of not 
remembering the arrest when she filled out the forms implausible. In April 2008, 
Applicant filled out another SF-86 and failed to list her two assault arrests that occurred 
in June and November of 2002. She also claims to have forgotten about these arrests 
when she filled out the SF-86. Again, given that there were two similar incidents where 
the police were called to the scene and wrote out detailed reports, I find Applicant’s lack 
of memory implausible. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶¶ 2.e – 2.g.   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 The record is absent any evidence that Applicant made any efforts to correct her 
omissions before being notified of her falsifications. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Although each arrest by itself might be characterized as minor, the cumulative effect of 
four arrests over a 12-year time frame calls into question Applicant’s good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered that the Applicant 
experienced periods of unemployment/underemployment, and her current separation 
and possible divorce. I have also considered that she supports her four children. Except 
for one debt showing a zero balance, she did not provide documentation to show she 
paid any of her delinquent debts. She did not provide information that she has an 
executed a repayment plan or settlement agreement with any of the creditors. 
Additionally, her involvement in four separate arrests over a 12-year period reflects her 
poor judgment. She also engaged in deliberate falsification on three separate occasions 
when she failed to list her past criminal actions on security clearance questionnaires 
and enlistment paperwork. Therefore, she failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
