KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant due process claims are unsuccessful.  Whatever objections might have been
available regarding the testimony of an OPM investigator were waived. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 08-04546.a1
DATE: 07/08/2010
DATE: July 8, 2010
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-04546
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 30, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
2
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 29, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process; whether
the Judge’s formal findings are inconsistent with his analysis; and whether the Judge erred in his
application of the mitigating conditions.  Finding no harmful error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is married with two
children.  He holds a Bachelor of Science degree.  
He began using illegal drugs in high school.  He experimented with marijuana, cocaine and
hashish during the late 1970s and used marijuana with friends while in college.  After college he
went to work for a Defense contractor and was awarded a security clearance.  Despite his knowledge
of Defense policy on drug abuse, he continued to smoke marijuana, though at a reduced frequency.
He sometimes contributed money toward the purchase of marijuana for sharing among his friends.
Applicant quit using marijuana in 2004 but resumed using it during the first half of 2005.
He has not used marijuana since June 2005, and he rarely associates with his former associates who
were involved in drugs.  
In 1980 Applicant tried cultivating marijuana.  He tried cultivating it again in 1987, growing
four or five plants in his closet.
In 1984 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA).  He omitted reference
to his prior purchases of illegal drugs, due to embarrassment.
In 1988, Applicant was interviewed by a representative of the Defense Investigative Service
(DIS).  He stated that the had omitted his drug purchase in 1984 due to concerns over the effect
truthful answers would have had on his clearance.  During this interview, he initially denied having
cultivated marijuana.  However, when confronted with evidence that he had in fact done so,
Applicant admitted the conduct and stated that he had lied in order to keep his job.  In this interview,
he stated that he would no longer use drugs.
In 2007, Applicant completed another SCA.  He admitted to having used illegal drugs, but
he denied the purchase, sale, or manufacturing of such within the previous seven years.  During a
2008 interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant stated that he had never sold, supplied,
manufactured, or grown illegal drugs.  
In the Analysis portion of the decision, the Judge cleared Applicant of the Guideline H
concerns.  However, he concluded that Applicant’s omissions had been deliberate and that, under
the circumstances, he had failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from them.
3
Applicant’s appeal raises the issue of whether he was denied due process. The issue involves
the testimony of an OPM investigator taken by telephone at the hearing and Applicant’s efforts to
contact her though Department Counsel prior to the hearing.  Applicant argues that, with more time
to prepare, he could have done a better job of questioning the investigator.  For this purpose both
parties cite to documents which are not in the record.  Applicant submitted documentation to the
Judge which was not admitted into evidence.  The Judge failed to preserve the documents for the
record, which was error.  Applicant’s brief contains four enclosures which, for purposes of resolving
this issue, the Board will accept as accurately reflecting the documentation not accepted into
evidence.  
Enclosure 1 shows that Applicant, by means of an e-mail dated December 14, 2009, to
Department Counsel sought to obtain a statement from the OPM investigator to confirm his
description of events or, in the alternative, to have her as a witness.  Enclosure 2 contains a letter
from Applicant, dated December 28, 2009, to Department Counsel requesting contact information
or a statement from the named investigator and delineating Applicant’s attempts at contacting her
himself.  Also in Enclosure 2 is a list of documents to be presented at the hearing, including the
contents of Enclosures 1 and 2.  Enclosure 3 includes a January 11, 2010, e-mail from Applicant
again requesting contact information for the investigator so that Applicant can obtain a statement
from her.  Enclosure 4 contains multiple e-mails dated January 11, 2010.  Department Counsel
advises Applicant that he has called the investigator, that the investigator has interviews in another
city the day of the hearing, so she cannot attend.  He then says, “I will arrange with the Judge to do
telephonic testimony of her during our hearing.  We probably will have to take her out of order, but
I cannot subpoena her.  Hopefully this will work for you.”  Applicant responds: “I appreciate your
efforts.  I thought a statement from [OPM Investigator] to corroborate the interview discussion as
I described would be sufficient.  Alternatively, her telephonic testimony will be greatly appreciated.
I trust she has been advised of the matter and will have had an opportunity to review her meeting
notes?  Have you shared my description of the discussion with her?  Thank you again.” Department
Counsel responds “I have provided her with Exhibits 8 and 9, the affidavits she prepared.  It will be
up to you elicit expected testimony from her.”
At the beginning of the hearing two days later, the OPM investigator was contacted by
telephone, and Applicant asked her several questions.  Although she recalled Applicant, she could
not recall the information he sought.  At no time did he object to the timing or the format of her
testimony.  After she testified Applicant said “. . . I will describe the details of the testimony leading
to the affidavit that contains my admission.  I did hoped (sic) that [OPM Investigator] would
recollect the details of the discussion better.  I’ve been attempting to get in contact with her to
respond to my statement or provide testimony.  I appreciate the opportunity to have her.  And I’ll
have to describe the details, by my recollection which was very vivid.”  (Tr.  35)
At no time–whether at the beginning of the hearing, during or after the questioning of the
investigator, or at the hearing’s conclusion–did Applicant state that he had not had enough time to
prepare.  We conclude that whatever objections might have been available to Applicant regarding
the timing of the witness’s participation in the proceedings, her availability to Applicant, or the
format in which her testimony was taken, were waived.
We also note that, in the 2007 SCA (prior to the 2008 interview with the OPM investigator) Applicant denied1
ever having used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance.  This denial is inconsistent with record evidence and
the Judge’s finding that he had, in fact, done so.  Although this apparently false statement was not separately alleged,
it is relevant to the issue of Applicant’s knowledge and intent and buttresses the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant
deliberately omitted information he was required to provide.  
4
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his conclusion as to mitigation under Guideline
E.  We have examined the Judge’s decision in light of the record as a whole.  We note the multiple
nature of Applicant’s omissions and his stated motives for the ones occurring in 1984 and 1988.  We
also note the hearing testimony of the OPM investigator in which she unequivocally denied having
advised Applicant in 2008 that it was permissible to lie.   The Judge’s conclusion as to mitigation1
is sustainable, in light of the standard announced in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
528 (1988) (“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”)   
Applicant contends that the Judge’s decision is inconsistent.  This argument pertains to a
SOR allegation under Guideline E that Applicant had used marijuana while holding a security
clearance.  The Judge entered a formal finding against Applicant on this allegation, although the
Analysis portion of the decision contains language suggesting that the Judge believed it had been
mitigated.  To the extent that this is an error, it is harmless, in light of the Judge’s sustainable
conclusions regarding Applicant’s deliberate omissions.  See ISCR Case No. 08-07528 at 2 (App.
Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) for a definition of harmless error.   
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
5
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Concurring Opinion of Administrative Judge James E. Moody
I agree with my colleagues that Applicant has waived the due process issue by failing to have
raised it at the hearing.  However, even if he had not waived the issue, I do not believe that he was
denied an adequate opportunity to prepare his case.  Applicant contended that the investigator had
advised him that it was acceptable for Applicant to deny having grown drugs, because his cultivation
of marijuana had occurred a long time ago.  However, when questioned at the hearing, the
investigator denied having said that.
Q: Is it possible . . . I answered “Yes, I had grown a small amount, a small number
of marijuana plants in the 1980s.”  Do you recall, or is it possible that I did answer
that in our discussion that I had, in fact, admitted to that use?  
A: I don’t recall.  
Q: . . . I asked you to read the statement again to see if there was some passage of
time that . . .  would allow a negative response to that question?  
A: What are you asking me?   
Q: . . . [I]s it possible that you advised me that the fraction was so small and so long
ago that that did not warrant a positive response?
A: No.  Tr. at 19-20.  
The investigator’s testimony was unequivocal that she did not advise Applicant that he could
legitimately deny having grown marijuana.  There is nothing in the record or in Applicant’s brief to
suggest that he could have uncovered other evidence in support of his contention, if he had had more
time prior to the hearing.  I see no reason to believe that Applicant’s right to prepare his case and to
present evidence in his behalf was compromised.   
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
