 
1 
 
 
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-11648 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On August 22, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 13, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered (AR) the SOR in writing on February 18, 2010, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On March 15, 2010, DOHA 
assigned the case to me and issued a Notice of Hearing on March 24, 2010. The case 
was heard on April 28, 2010, as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and called 
two witnesses. He offered three exhibits marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on May 6, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e of the SOR. He denied the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.c, 2.a 
and 2.b. His admissions are incorporated into the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and unmarried. He has three children, ages six, four, 
and two, with his long-term girlfriend. He grew up in a military environment as his father 
served in the Army for 31 years. He graduated from high school in 2000 and started 
working for defense contractors in February 2002. He has been steadily employed,  
except for a six month period from October 2007 to April 2008. In May 2008, he started 
his present position as an engineering technician. He was laid off from his position in 
March 2010 pending the disposition of this case. 
 
 Applicant has a criminal history, involving five arrests and four convictions. In 
May 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with Burglary of a Vehicle, a felony, 
after he and his friends stole a fishing pole out a truck. He pleaded guilty and was 
placed on probation for one year. He was 17 years old. (Tr. 58; GE 2) In September 
1998, he was arrested and charged with Burglary of Habitation, a felony, after he and 
friends stole items out of an open garage. He pleaded guilty, served 30 days in jail, 
placed on probation for five years, fined $1,000, and paid $216 in court costs. The 
probation terminated early in May 2001. (Tr. 59; GE 2 at 2.) He attributed both incidents 
to immaturity and associating with the wrong friends. (Id.)  
 
 In November 2003, Applicant was approached by a man, who claimed that he 
needed money to buy medicine for his children. The man asked Applicant to pawn a 
television for him because he was unable to do so with his out-of-state identification. 
Applicant agreed to help the man. After learning that the television was stolen, he was 
arrested and charged with Burglary of Habitation, a felony, in March 2004. Applicant 
was released from jail after five days and the charges were dismissed. (Tr. 53; GE 2 at 
4.) Applicant’s father was present at the time the man approached his son. Both 
Applicant’s father and Applicant had previously seen the man in the neighborhood 
before the incident. His father was not alarmed by the man’s request and suggested 
that his son help the man. (Tr.  41-44.) 
 
 In December 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While 
Intoxicated (DWI), a misdemeanor, after he and his friend were stopped by the police. 
 
3 
 
 
He pleaded guilty to the charge and was fined $3,000, payable in $1,000 increments per 
year. His driver’s license was suspended for six months. (GE at  4.) 
 
 In May 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with another DWI. He 
consumed about six alcoholic drinks at a club before getting into his car and bumping 
into a parked car. On September 19, 2008, he pleaded guilty to DWI, a misdemeanor. 
He was sentenced to 120 days in jail, fined $1,000, ordered to attend repeat alcohol 
offender class, and placed on supervised probation for 18 months. He was required to 
have an Ignition Interlock system placed on his automobile and undergo monthly 
urinalysis screenings. (GE 2 at 4; GE 7.) On March 19, 2010, the court entered an order 
terminating the probation and allowing him to remove the Ignition Interlock system. (Tr. 
72; AE 3.)  
 
 The court did not require Applicant to undergo an alcohol evaluation after the last 
conviction, but did require him to participate in Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. In 
2009, he attended three two-hour meetings and two educational sessions per week for 
six weeks. (Tr. 67, 75-76.) He has not obtained any counseling or participated in any 
other alcohol educational program. He does not believe he has a drinking problem or 
that his previous consumption of alcohol has affected his family. (Tr. 69, 70, 73.)  
 
 Applicant admitted that on occasion between 1999 and 2008, he consumed 
alcohol to excess. (Tr. 65.) He began drinking when he was 18 years old. For four 
years, Applicant regularly drank 15 to 20 beers over the weekend with friends. Since 
2003, he has attempted to moderate his consumption. (GE 2 at 5.) Presently, he 
consumes 12 to 18 beers throughout the week, or possibly over a weekend. (Tr. 65, 74-
76.) He considers himself a social drinker. (Tr. 77.) He no longer drives after consuming 
alcohol. (Tr. 73, 76.) As a consequence of the DWI convictions, he had to spend a large 
amount of money and learned that “it’s not worth it” to drink and drive. (Tr. 76.)   
  
 Applicant’s father testified. He is a retired Army staff sergeant with an impressive 
service record, who honorably served for 31 years and deployed to locations throughout 
the world. For the past 11 years, he has worked for defense contractors. Currently, he is 
a weapons tactics instructor. He held a security clearance during his military years and 
while working for defense contractors. He is aware of his son’s criminal history, but 
believes he has matured since the last incident and is responsibly managing his life. He 
and his son have a close relationship and speak frequently because his son and family 
live in the same neighborhood. He believes that his son “has tremendous potential to be 
a good, productive citizen if he’s only allowed or given the opportunity to do so.” (Tr. 
36.)  
 
 Applicant’s mother testified. She was present when the man requested her son to 
pawn the television. (Tr. 20.) She verified that the matter was dismissed. (Tr. 21.) She 
was supportive of her son. 
 
 Applicant was remorseful about his criminal behavior and previous immaturity. 
He acknowledged that alcohol created problems for his employment, but is uncertain 
 
4 
 
 
why he continues to consume it. (Tr. 78.) He presented a letter from his landlord, who 
considers him to be a good tenant and family man. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuse or alcohol dependent. 
Applicant has two alcohol-related incidents in his history. In 2004 and 2008, he 
was arrested and convicted of DWI. Based on those incidents, the Government raised a 
security concern under AG ¶ 22(a). Applicant admitted that from 1999 up to May 2008, 
he consumed alcohol at times to excess and to the point of intoxication. That evidence 
is sufficient to raise the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 22(c). 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. 
Conditions that could mitigate those disqualifications are provided under AG ¶ 23: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and, 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶ 23(a) provides some mitigation because Applicant’s last DWI occurred in 
May 2008, approximately two years ago. However, it was his second offense, raising 
questions about his judgment and precluding the full application of said mitigating 
condition. AG ¶ 23(b) provides minimal mitigation. Applicant acknowledged his previous 
immature behavior. He denies that he has an alcohol problem. The only evidence he 
presented documenting actions taken to address the issue, was his recent release from 
probation and testimony that he no longer consumes alcohol and drives. He did not 
provide any independent evidence establishing a pattern of sobriety or responsible 
drinking, which is also referenced under this guideline. In addition, he admitted that he 
drinks 12 to 18 beers during the week or on a weekend, indicating that he has not 
significantly reduced his alcohol consumption. There is no evidence in the record to 
support the application of AG ¶ 23(c) or AG ¶ 23(d), which require active participation in 
formalized treatment programs. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:  
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
From 1998 to 2008, Applicant was arrested five times, convicted four times, and 
sentenced four times. The evidence raised both disqualifications.  
AG ¶ 32 provides a condition that could mitigate disqualifications arising under 
this guideline: 
 
7 
 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
Applicant expressed remorse for his criminal history. He was arrested and 
convicted of two burglary charges in 1998, when he was 17 years old. His next arrest 
occurred in 2003, when he was 22 years old. That charge was later dismissed. A year 
later, in 2004 at the age of 23, he was arrested and convicted of DWI. His next offense 
occurred in 2008, when he was again arrested and convicted of DWI. In March 2010, 
the court entered an order terminating his probation and authorizing the removal of the 
breathalyzer lock system from his car. Since that last arrest, he has not been charged 
with criminal misconduct. He has worked for his current employer for eight years. His 
remorsefulness, work record, and successful completion of all probationary terms are 
evidence of rehabilitation. However, given that he completed his third and most recent 
probationary term within the past three months, the evidence of rehabilitation presented 
is insufficient to fully mitigate his criminal history that spans ten years. He has only been 
outside the legal system for three months, which is insufficient to conclude that his 
pattern of criminal conduct is in the past.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 29-year-
old man, who possesses potential for success in his career and strong parental support. 
He expressed a commitment to his job and changing his behavior.  He asserted that he 
is careful not to drink and drive any more. However, his change in attitude is recent and 
does not adequately mitigate the concerns raised by the Government. While he appears 
 
8 
 
 
honest and dedicated to moving forward with his life, he has not established a track 
record of exercising good judgment, outside of a court-ordered probation, sufficient to 
persuade me that he appreciates the havoc excessive alcohol consumption and criminal 
conduct has played in his life and family. Other than assertions that he consumes 
alcohol responsibly (which based on the quantities he drinks is questionable), he 
provided no independent evidence to corroborate his testimony that similar problems 
are unlikely to recur. In fact, he feels that he does not have an alcohol problem, or 
understand why he continues to routinely drink alcohol despite two convictions for DWI. 
Since his second DWI arrest, he has chosen not to participate in any form of counseling 
or rehabilitation, other than attending several mandatory Alcoholics Anonymous 
meetings. Absent such evidence, his testimony and recent release from criminal 
probation does not adequately document permanent behavioral insight and changes.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
