KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline G
DIGEST: It is permissible for the Judge to consider record evidence of uncharged conduct for the
limited purpose of evaluating credibility.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-11888.a1
DATE: 07/30/2010
DATE: July 30, 2010
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-11888
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
James W. Green, Esq.
The Judge made formal findings favorable to Applicant under Guideline E.  Those favorable findings are not1
at issue on appeal.
  
The written decision was admitted without Applicant objection as Government Exhibit (GE) 4.  Tr. at 17.  This2
document included information pertinent to the Judge’s findings.  It also stated that, in the late 1980s, while on active
duty, Applicant received psychological counseling for having tortured the family cat over the course of two months
because the cat “did not give him much attention.”  It stated that Applicant was involved in a motor vehicle accident in
a European country after consuming alcohol and that his wife had told him she believed he had a problem with alcohol.
Furthermore, the document stated that  Applicant “had involvement with marijuana, psilocybin mushrooms, and cocaine
in the 1980s after he entered the USN and was aware of the policy prohibiting the use of illegal drugs in the military.”
GE 4 summarized the psychological evaluation performed on Applicant: “The risk that [Applicant] will engage in
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 29, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 26, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge improperly considered
misconduct which was not alleged in the SOR; whether the Judge erred in her application of the
mitigating factors; and whether the Judge erred in her whole-person analysis.   Consistent with the1
following discussion, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an employee of a
Defense contractor.  He served in the U.S. Navy for 23 years, retiring in 2005 as a Commander (0-5).
He has held a security clearance since approximately 1983.  
In 2006 Applicant’s employer sponsored him for access to sensitive compartmented
information (SCI).  He underwent a series of interviews and polygraph examinations.  During the
course of the SCI investigation, Applicant revealed that he had driven a motor vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol on numerous occasions, although he had never been charged or convicted.
Applicant consumes alcohol presently, a beer and a glass of wine with dinner every other day.  
As a consequence of these interviews, Applicant was requested to submit to a complete
psychological examination.  The psychologist advised Applicant to stop drinking.  The psychologist
stated that Applicant had “a history of failing to conform his behavior to social norms.”  Decision
at 3.  
Other information obtained during Applicant’s SCI interviews include that Applicant had,
on one occasion, leaked information to a member of the news media, due to frustration with his chain
of command.  The leaked information was not classified.  Following the investigation, Applicant was
denied access to SCI.   “The decision concluded that Applicant has proven an unwillingness to2
behavior indicative of poor judgment, irresponsibility, or impulsivity in the future appears to fall in the high range.  This
is due to his extensive history of engaging in multiple risky behaviors.”  
3
follow laws, rules, and regulations.  It cited him for a long history of questionable decision-making.”
Id.  
During an interview regarding his current security clearance application (SCA), Applicant
advised that he had used illegal drugs more than 20 years prior.  In a later re-interview, he admitted
that he had not disclosed his drug use on previous SCAs.  He also stated that he had used illegal
drugs while holding a security clearance.  Applicant enjoys the esteem of his former Navy colleagues
for his trustworthiness and duty performance.
Applicant contends that it was improper for the Judge to have considered his failure to have
disclosed his drug use.  “There was no mention of this concern in the Statement of Reasons.  This
should not have been used against him since he did not have the opportunity to present a defense
regarding this fact.”  Applicant Brief at 6.  However, the Judge stated, in the Analysis portion of her
decision, that she considered this matter “for the limited purpose of determining whether [Applicant]
is credible, whether his pattern of rule violations is mitigated under personal conduct, and as part of
my whole-person analysis.”  Decision at 14.  This limited use was permissible.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 02-07218 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004).  Additionally, evidence underlying these false denials
was contained in documents admitted at the hearing with no objection from Applicant.  Tr. at 17.
We conclude that there was no error in the Judge’s treatment of this issue.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
06-08598 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2008).
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  She discussed in some detail why the disqualifying conduct established
under Guideline E was not mitigated.  After a review of the record evidence, the Board concludes
that the Judge’s ultimate determination that Applicant’s Guideline E conduct was not mitigated is
sustainable.
   
Applicant has cited to other decisions by Hearing Office Judges which, he contends, are
similar to his own and in which applicants were granted security clearances.  We have given these
decisions due consideration.  However, they have significant factual differences from Applicant’s
case.  In any event, decisions by the Hearing Office are not binding on the Appeal Board.  See ISCR
Case No. 06-24121 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008).  Each case must be decided upon its own merits.
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made,’” both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person
factors.  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S.
4
29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                   
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
