 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-03474 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 23, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). On September 25, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 1, 2009, and DOHA 
received his answer on October 5, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to 
 
2 
 
 
proceed on November 9, 2009. The case was assigned to me on November 17, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 12, 2010, scheduling the hearing for 
January 27, 2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
received into evidence. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
received into evidence, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until February 12, 2010, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
AE B through L, which were received into evidence. Applicant subsequently submitted 
AE M and N on March 3, 2010, which were forwarded by Department Counsel on 
March 5, 2010, without objection, and received into evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 4, 2010. The record closed on March 5, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the sole SOR allegation with explanations. His answer with 
explanations is incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old principal subsystems engineer, who has worked for 
his defense contractor employer since July 2008. He is a first-time applicant for a 
security clearance. Successfully vetting for a security clearance is a condition of his 
continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 22-24, 28.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1976. He attended community 
college from January 1977 to June 1979, and was awarded an Associate’s Degree in 
Engineering in June 1979. Applicant transferred to and attended a four-year university 
from August 1979 to December 1982, and was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree 
in Electrical Engineering Technology. He later attended graduate school on a part-time 
basis from April 1999 to December 2002, and was awarded a Master’s Degree in 
Project Management in December 2002. (GE 1, Tr. 24-26.) 
 
Applicant married his wife in May 1981. They have two children, a 24-year-old 
daughter and a 21-year-old son. Their daughter lives independently and their son is 
attending college and lives at home. (GE 1, Tr. 26-27.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The sole allegation in this case consists of a $57,809 residual debt on a second 
mortgage after Applicant executed a deed in lieu of foreclosure on an investment 
home he purchased in 2006. (SOR ¶ 1.a.)  
 
3 
 
 
For the past 28 years, Applicant has had a successful career. Except for three 
brief periods of unemployment in the last ten years, he has been fully employed. 
Throughout this time, Applicant and his wife have enjoyed a middle class lifestyle, 
have lived conservatively, and have raised two successful children. They have an 
unblemished history of paying their bills on time, were responsible and prudent in their 
savings and investments, and maintained excellent credit ratings. 
 
In June 2005, Applicant saw a television ad for an investment real estate 
program that offered investors a “win-win” program promising substantial returns. 
Looking for additional funds to underwrite his son’s college education, Applicant chose 
to participate in the program. Essentially, the investment “strategy” was based on 
identifying individuals such as the Applicant with excellent credit history and qualifying 
income to purchase a home for a buyer unable to qualify for a home purchase. The 
buyer would select a home in concert with the investment program, which the investor 
purchased. The buyer would then rent the home for one year from the investor. During 
the one-year period, the buyer would undergo credit enhancement to improve their 
credit, which theoretically would qualify the buyer to purchase the home from the 
investor. The investment program vetted prospective investors and buyers and found 
suitable matches. It was represented to Applicant that he could make up to $20,000 or 
7% profit, if everything went well during the course of the year. 
 
Consistent with applicable guidelines, the investment program found a buyer (a 
couple) to match with the Applicant. The Applicant purchased a home for the buyer, 
the buyer moved into their new home in January 2006, and began making payments 
as agreed. The real estate market then collapsed and in March 2007, the value of the 
investment home had decreased to the point that financing became out of reach for 
the buyer. To make matters worse, the lender who was to loan money to the buyer to 
purchase the home went out of business. Negotiations ensued and the buyer decided 
to “walk away” from the deal and vacated the house. Applicant consulted with 14 
different subject matter experts to include realtors, mortgage bankers, attorneys, 
financial planners, and even the past president of the board of realtors. The collective 
wisdom and advice Applicant received from these subject matter experts was to let the 
property go into foreclosure.  
 
Applicant did not want his property to foreclose and against the advice of the 
subject matter experts decided to renovate the property with the hope of renting his 
home until the real estate market recovered. Applicant’s documented efforts to 
renovate the property were in a word, remarkable. When the renovations were 
complete, the home was truly show-worthy. Unfortunately, while the renovations were 
ongoing, the market continued to deteriorate and the market became flooded with 
rental homes. Applicant was unable to get a rental income sufficient to allow him to 
keep the home. He then tried unsuccessfully to refinance the loan on his investment 
property, and even explored a short sale. The record is replete with Applicant’s 
exhaustive efforts and consultations with subject matter experts to do everything 
possible to keep the property and avoid foreclosure. His investment property was 
depleting his savings and there was no hope in sight of a successful outcome. To 
 
4 
 
 
avoid complete financial ruin and only after extensive discussions with his lender and 
consultations with the subject matter experts previously discussed, Applicant executed 
a deed in lieu of foreclosure with his lender. The end result was that Applicant was left 
with a deficiency as alleged in the SOR after the property was sold. Applicant 
submitted documentation that he was not liable for the deficiency owed based on his 
state’s anti-deficiency statute. The foregoing is a summary of what occurred and is 
thoroughly documented in exhaustive detail in AE A through L.  
 
Per the advice of his attorney, Applicant did not contact or make any payments 
to the lender for the deficiency in question. However, in an attempt to resolve this 
matter, Applicant contacted the lender post-hearing and negotiated a one-time 
payment settlement. The lender has submitted verification to the credit reporting 
agencies reflecting Applicant owes a zero balance on the alleged debt and the 
account as being closed. The debt in question is resolved. (AE M, AE N.) Applicant is 
current on all his monthly bills and has a net remainder of $420 to $680 depending on 
his wife’s hourly work schedule. (AE B). 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided five reference letters. These letters cover a range of 
personal and work-related sources. The collective sense of these letters depicts 
Applicant as a very honorable and trustworthy individual. They describe Applicant as 
diligent, competent, and someone whose character warrants the granting of a security 
clearance. (AE A(16)). Applicant also submitted work performance evaluations from 
2003 to 2009. These evaluations reflect sustained above-average performance and 
note his potential for future service in the defense industry. (AE A(17)). Additionally, 
Applicant submitted copies of numerous awards, citations, letters, and e-mails that 
span his working career and further reflect his professionalism as well as his 
community involvement. (AE A(18)). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude one relevant security concern is under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. As 
indicated in SOR¶ 1.a., he had a delinquent debt of $57,809 that was delinquent since 
2007. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
All of the foregoing mitigating conditions apply in whole or in part. The 
circumstances and conditions under which this sole debt arose are unique, isolated, 
unlikely to recur, and directly attributable to real estate conditions and the market 
downfall. Applicant exercised due diligence before, during, and after the purchase of 
his investment property. AG ¶ 20(a) fully applies.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives full credit because the market forces 
which brought about the deterioration of the real estate market were beyond his 
control. He remained in constant contact with his creditor. Again, Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances as discussed supra.1  
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
As discussed supra, Applicant consulted with no less than 14 subject matter 
experts and sought their counsel to resolve his dilemma to include bankers and 
financial planners. The debt in question is resolved and therefore under control AG ¶ 
20(c) fully applies.  
 
Although belated in approaching the creditor, Applicant’s reticence in doing so 
was based on the advice of his attorney. The debt has since been settled. The credit 
reporting agencies have been contacted to show that Applicant has a zero balance 
and the account in question is closed. There is sufficient information to establish full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2  
 
Under his state’s anti-deficiency statute and upon the advice of counsel, 
Applicant reasonably and honestly believed that he had a basis to dispute the debt in 
question. However, once it was made clear to him that he would be unable to rely on 
such a defense under DOHA case law, he reevaluated his position and approached 
the creditor and settled the debt. Applicant’s documentation supports a reasonable 
basis to dispute the debt in question, lending credence to his failure to act until 
recently. AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists a 
$57,809 debt that has been in arrears since 2007. Although recently settled, his lack 
of success in resolving this delinquent debt until recently raises sufficient security 
concerns to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of employment and sound financial history weighs in his favor. He is 
a law-abiding citizen. His debt is settled and resolved. His monthly expenses are 
current. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His company 
fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He had an isolated 
real estate investment that went bad. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust 
 
9 
 
 
him. Furthermore, he has established and maintained a “meaningful track record” of 
financial responsibility. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts 
and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
