 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07711 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 21, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 4, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on June 10, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 10, 2010. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 18, 2010.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
Applicant requested an expedited hearing to accommodate her trip to the United 
States from Iraq, where she has been working as a linguist for a defense contactor. She 
affirmatively waived her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before 
the hearing.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted written requests that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Iraq and Syria. Applicant did not object to either request, and they 
were approved. The requests and the attached documents were not admitted into 
evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is seeking to 
retain a security clearance she has held without a violation since 2004. She was born in 
Iraq. She graduated from high school in Iraq. She married in 1990 and divorced in 2005. 
She has a 15-year-old child, who was born in the United States.1  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1990 to visit an aunt who lived here. Iraq 
invaded Kuwait about three months after she arrived in the United States. She met her 
husband, who was an Iraqi citizen but was living in the United States as a permanent 
resident at the time. He is now a U.S. citizen. They married and she remained in the 
United States. She became a U.S. citizen in 2000.2   
 
 Applicant’s parents immigrated to the United States in 2001. Her mother became 
a U.S. citizen in 2007. Her father became a U.S. citizen in 2009.3 
  
 Applicant has a brother and a sister who are still Iraqi citizens. Her brother fled 
Iraq in the early 1990s to avoid mandatory military service. He was able to make his 
way to Denmark, where he was granted asylum. He currently lives in Denmark. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33, 37-43, 69-70; GE 1-4. 
 
2 Tr. at 33-40; GE 1-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 49-50; GE 1-5. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s mother is in the process of sponsoring him for immigration to the United 
States.4 
 
 Applicant’s sister is married with two children. Her husband and their children are 
also Iraqi citizens. He worked for an Iraqi company that did contract work for a U.S. 
company. He felt threatened by insurgent groups, and they moved to Syria in the mid 
2000s. Applicant’s sister and her husband do not work in Syria. They are supported 
financially by Applicant and her parents, who are also sponsoring them for immigration 
to the United States.5 
 
 Applicant visited her parents and her sister in Iraq in 2000. Her sister was getting 
married, and her father had recently had a heart attack. She has numerous aunts, 
uncles, and cousins who are citizens and residents of Iraq. None of her family members 
are associated with the governments of Iraq or Syria or have any connection to any 
terrorist organization. Applicant has not visited any family members in Iraq since 2000. 
Her extended family members in Iraq are not aware that she has been working in Iraq 
since 2005. Her sister knows Applicant works in Iraq, but she does not know what she 
does. Applicant does not communicate with any of her overseas relatives while she is in 
Iraq. The only time she communicates with them is when she returns to the United 
States on vacation.6 
 
 Applicant is a proud supporter and contributor to the mission in Iraq. She loves 
the United States, where she is able to live in peace and freedom, and people have 
similar values and beliefs as she and her family.7  
 
 Applicant has been a linguist for defense contractors since 2003. From 2003 to 
2005, she worked in Qatar. She has worked in Iraq since 2005. Applicant has 
experienced combat situations in Iraq, including rocket and mortar attacks. She is willing 
to accept the danger because she believes in the mission. She submitted copies of 20 
military, defense, and contractor “coins” she has received throughout her time overseas. 
She received multiple certificates of achievement from senior military and defense 
personnel for her outstanding support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.8 One certificate 
noted: 
 
This certificate is presented in sincere appreciation of your dedication and 
outstanding support in the processing and exploitation of the material 
captured during the attack on [place and date of attack]. As direct results 
of your work, captured insurgents responsible for the attack are being 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 47-49, 51-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. at 47-49, 53-57, 61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A, C. 
 
6 Tr. at 53, 61-68, 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
7 Tr. at 34, 46, 56, 72-73, 87-90. 
 
8 Tr. at 40-44, 73, 84-86; GE 1-4; AE D, E. 
 
4 
 
brought to justice. Thank you for your contributions to [defense agency] 
and our nation’s war on terror.9 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters attesting to her outstanding job 
performance, commitment, dedication, expertise, professionalism, and judgment. One 
author noted that Applicant “rendered exceptionally meritorious service in a designated 
combat zone while translating documents of extreme National interest.”10 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that she would report to security personnel any 
attempt to use her family against her. She reported another linguist in Iraq who 
requested that she commit a security violation.11 
 
Iraq  
 
The Iran-Iraq war (1980-88) devastated the economy of Iraq. Iraq declared 
victory in 1988 but actually achieved a weary return to the status quo antebellum. The 
war left Iraq with the largest military establishment in the Gulf region but with huge debts 
and an ongoing rebellion by Kurdish elements in the northern mountains. The 
government suppressed the rebellion by using chemical and biological weapons on 
civilian targets, including a mass chemical weapons attack on the Kurdish city of 
Halabja that killed several thousand civilians. 
 
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, but a U.S.-led coalition acting under United 
Nations (UN) resolutions expelled Iraq in February 1991. After the war, Kurds in the 
north and Shi’a Muslims in the south rebelled against the government of Saddam 
Hussein. The government responded quickly and with crushing force, killing thousands, 
and pursued damaging environmental and agricultural policies meant to drain the 
marshes of the south. 
 
In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power 
in Iraq. Following the swift invasion and successful removal of Hussein’s government 
from power, the United States endeavored to set a solid foundation of democratic 
institutions in Iraq. The Constitution in Iraq was ratified on October 15, 2005. After free 
elections in 2005, Iraq's new government, a parliamentary democracy, took office in 
March 2006.  
 
In 2007, 92% of Iraq’s exports were in crude oil and crude oil materials. Almost 
half of Iraq’s exports went to the United States. The United States’ ultimate goal in Iraq 
is to establish a peaceful, united, stable, democratic, and secure nation that will be an 
ally of the United States in the war against terrorism. The United States has invested 
                                                          
9 AE E. 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Tr. at 72-73. 
 
 
5 
 
thousands of lives and billions of dollars to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq. Success 
in Iraq is a high national priority of the United States. 
 
Despite the elections and new government, Baghdad, Mosul, and several other 
areas have especially serious problems with violent terrorists and insurgents. Although 
there have been recent improvements in the security environment, Iraq remains 
dangerous, volatile, and unpredictable. Some areas of Iraq are more peaceful and less 
susceptible to terrorist attacks than others; however, all areas of the country are still 
very dangerous. Terrorists have the ability to strike most areas of the country with 
explosive devices and mines. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the 
U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with 
aggressive governmental action against terrorists by U.S. and Iraqi forces, the threat of 
terrorism in Iraq remains very high. Terrorist groups can conduct intelligence activities 
as effectively as state intelligence services. 
Human rights concerns include a climate of violence; misappropriation of official 
authority by sectarian, criminal, and extremist groups; arbitrary deprivation of life; 
disappearances; torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or 
punishment; impunity; poor conditions in pretrial detention and prison facilities; denial of 
fair public trials; delays in resolving property restitution claims; immature judicial 
institutions lacking capacity; arbitrary arrest and detention; arbitrary interference with 
privacy and home; other abuses in internal conflicts; limitations on freedoms of speech, 
press, assembly, and association due to sectarianism and extremist threats and 
violence; restrictions on religious freedom; restrictions on freedom of movement; large 
numbers of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees; lack of protection of 
refugees and stateless persons; lack of transparency and widespread, severe 
corruption at all levels of government; constraints on international organizations and 
nongovernmental organizations’ (NGOs) investigations of alleged violations of human 
rights; discrimination against and societal abuses of women and ethnic and religious 
minorities; human trafficking; societal discrimination and violence against individuals 
based on sexual orientation; and limited exercise of labor rights. 
Syria 
 
Syria borders on Iraq, Israel, Turkey, and Lebanon. Syria is approximately the 
same size as North Dakota. Syria’s population is about 19 million people. Officially Syria 
is a republic; however, in reality it is ruled by an authoritarian regime. Syria is included 
on the U.S. State Department's List of State Sponsors of Terrorism. There are several 
known terrorist groups in Syria. The government of Syria continues to provide political 
and material support to Hezbollah and Palestinian terrorist groups. Several terrorist 
groups maintain their offices and some of their leadership in Syria. In addition, the 
government of Syria permits Iran to transfer weapons and supplies through their country 
to assist terrorists in Lebanon. Syria is one of the main transit points for foreign fighters 
entering Iraq. A travel warning for Syria warns about the risks of terrorism due to the 
September 2006 attack on the U.S. embassy in Damascus. Syrian forces killed the four 
individuals who attacked the U.S. embassy in 2006. There have been other attacks on 
the U.S. Ambassador’s residence and the U.S. embassy in 1998 and 2000. The United 
 
6 
 
States instituted economic sanctions against Syria due to their active and passive 
support of terrorism in the Middle East. No commercial aircraft owned or operated by 
the Syrian government may take off or land in the United States.  
 
There are human rights abuses in Syria that include: systematic repression of 
Syrian citizens’ ability to peacefully change the government; arbitrary and unlawful 
deprivation of life; torture and physical abuse of prisoners and detainees; arbitrary 
arrests and detentions; restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, and 
association; government corruption; and violence and discrimination against women. 
Torture is occasionally used, including against foreign citizens. Security personnel have 
placed foreign visitors under surveillance, have monitored telephones, and have 
searched hotel rooms and possessions of foreign citizens.  
 
Syria opposed the Iraq war in 2003, and foreign relations between Syria and the 
United States deteriorated. In 2005, the United States withdrew its ambassador to Syria 
after the assassination of Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
7 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant has family members who are Iraqi citizens. Her brother is an Iraqi 
citizen and a resident of Denmark. Her sister and her sister’s family are citizens of Iraq 
 
8 
 
and residents of Syria, a country that is clearly hostile to the United States.12 Syria is a 
state sponsor of terrorism, and the Syrian government has committed numerous, 
serious human rights abuses against its people. Applicant has aunts, uncles, and 
cousins who are citizens and residents of Iraq. Iraq has human rights issues, and it has 
been victimized by terrorism. The presence of Applicant’s family members in Syria and 
Iraq creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
The presence of Applicant’s brother in Denmark does not create a potential 
conflict of interest or a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant.  
 
  Applicant sends money to her sister in Syria. That is evidence of Applicant’s ties 
of affection to her sister. The security concerns raised by Applicant’s sister are already 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. There are no independent Foreign Influence security concerns 
raised by the money transfer. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Applicant traveled to Iraq in 2000 to visit family members. That has no 
independent security significance.13 SOR ¶ 1.e is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant has been in the United States since 1990, and she has been a U.S. 
citizen since 2000. Her parents are now U.S. citizens and residents. She loves the 
peace and freedom offered to her by America, and desires the same for her brother and 
sister. Her brother fled Iraq in the early 1990s and has settled in Denmark, a country 
that does not create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. She has extended family 
members in Iraq and her sister’s family lives in Syria. Those countries have continuing 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 06-18337 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2008). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). 
 
9 
 
human rights and terrorist concerns. Because of the nature of those governments and 
the terrorist concerns, I am unable to find AG ¶ 8(a) applicable.  
 
 Applicant has served the Iraqi mission since 2003, first from Qatar, and since 
2005 from Iraq. She served in a combat zone and has been subject to mortar and 
missile attacks because she believes in the mission. She made a significant contribution 
to the war effort. She has held a security clearance without violation and reported 
another linguist for an infraction. She has not visited any family members living in Iraq 
since 2000. She does not communicate with her overseas family members while she is 
in Iraq. She credibly testified that she would report to security officials any attempt to 
use her family members against her. The Appeal Board has stated that such testimony, 
standing alone, is of limited value, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has 
acted in a similar manner in the past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant 
has a previous track record of complying with security regulations and procedures in the 
context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which he or she made a significant 
contribution to the national security.14 In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 
14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed this issue: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
I find Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
America that she can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Analysis 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
 
10 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and service in Qatar and 
Iraq. I also considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq. Guideline B is not 
limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United States has a compelling 
interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, 
organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.”15 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be 
made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. I have also 
considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Syria, a country that is clearly hostile 
to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she has 
family members in a hostile country. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
11 
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. She credibly testified that she would report 
any attempt to use her family members to coerce her to reveal classified information. 
The Appeal Board has held that “generally, an applicant’s statements, by themselves, 
as to what he [or she] would do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity 
are entitled to little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an 
applicant in a Guideline B case.”16 Iraq and Syria have human rights and terrorism 
issues. The complicated state of affairs in those countries places a significant burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her foreign family members do not pose an 
unacceptable security risk. She has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
