 
1 
 
 
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-05532 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On February 3, 2009, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 
85P).1 On January 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct).  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
                                                          
1 Applicant also completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Sensitive Positions (SF 86) on March 
24, 2009. (GE 1.) 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered (AR) the SOR in writing and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. On March 26, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me and issued a 
Notice of Hearing the same day. The case was heard on April 29, 2010, as scheduled.  
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the hearing transcript on May 9, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.d of the SOR, and denied the allegations contained in ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 
3.a. His admissions are incorporated into the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old and single. In August 2008, he earned a bachelor’s 
degree in applied sciences with a minor in construction management. He has an 
associate’s degree in applied sciences with a minor in automotive repair. In December 
2008, he began a position with his current employer, a defense contractor. He analyzes 
products for the military. He enjoys his job. (Tr. 14.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of arrests for Driving While Intoxicated (DWI). On April 29, 
2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI. On May 9, 2007, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with DWI. On August 25, 2007, he was arrested and charged with  
DWI. These three charges were consolidated into one case and resolved in early 
November 2007. He pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor for the May 2007 charge, and the 
April and August 2007 charges were dismissed. He paid a $1,300 fine. The court did not 
order an alcohol assessment or participation in alcohol counseling. He was 21 years old 
at the time, and admitted that he had consumed more than five beers with his friends 
prior to each of the three arrests. (GE at 3 at 76; Tr. 15.) 
 
 On November 19, 2007, shortly after this conviction, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with his fourth DWI. After breaking up with his girlfriend, he consumed more 
than four glasses of wine and drove his car. In May 2008, he went to court on the 
charge. He was ordered to pay a $700 fine and $398 in court costs. His driver’s license 
was suspended for six months, but he was allowed to drive to work and school. He was 
not ordered to undergo an alcohol assessment. (Tr. 19; GE 3 at 77.) 
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol when he was 19 or 20 years old, during his 
second year of college. He drank seven to ten beers, 10 to 15 times per month. (Tr. 30.) 
Since the last arrest in November 2007, Applicant has modified his alcohol 
consumption. He sometimes consumes four to seven beers, two to three times a month 
on weekends with friends if they are in town. (Tr. 21.) He does not drink and drive, but 
instead calls a friend or a taxi if he has consumed alcohol. (Tr. 32.) He has not been 
arrested for any other criminal conduct since his fourth arrest. He has not had any 
alcohol-related problems at work, home, or with his finances. (GE 2 at 82.) He no longer 
associates with the people who were involved in the first three alcohol-related incidents. 
 
3 
 
 
He testified that “I realized I needed to slow down and stay away from certain people 
and I have had a clean track record since then.” (Tr. 19, 36.)   
 
 On February 3, 2009, Applicant completed an on-line SF 85P for the first time. In 
response to “Section 16. Your Police Record: In the last 7 years, have you been 
arrested for charged with, or convicted of any offense(s),” he disclosed the November 
2007 and May 2008 convictions. He did not disclose the April 2007 and August 2007 
arrests. He explained that the on-line form, which he did at home in one day, did not 
provide sufficient space for more than two incidents and he determined that it was more 
important to disclose the two convictions, one of which resolved three arrests.2 In his 
answer, he denied that he intentionally withheld information about the two DWIs.3 (Tr. 
20, 24; GE 3 at 75.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his answer to Section 16, because he 
failed to disclose the April and August 2007 arrests. He testified that he did not falsify 
the SF 85P. He was not familiar with the process, and did not appreciate the importance 
of full and accurate disclosure. He filled it out at home without any assistance. (Tr. 34.) 
Under Section 7. Your Employment Record, Applicant disclosed that he had been fired 
from a position in June 2005 due to a conflict with his supervisor. (GE 2 at 3.) He stated: 
 
I tried to fill it out to the best of my knowledge, I was young, new to the 
workplace, eager to get started working, and it was definitely not on 
purpose to falsify any documents, and I just filled it out to the best of my 
knowledge on how to fill something out like that. I’ve never filled out a 
document like that before, that extensive. (Tr. 34.)  
 
 On May 5, 2009, a government investigator interviewed Applicant at work about 
his answers to Section 16 on the SF 85P. Applicant provided further details about the 
November 2007 and May 2008 convictions. He stated that he went to court in 
November 2007 for the May 2007 charge and again in May 2008 for the November 
2007 charge. He admitted that he had consumed alcohol before the arrests. He told the 
investigator that he had routinely been consuming seven to eight beers, ten to fifteen 
times a month. He became intoxicated eight to ten times a month. The interview lasted 
15 to 20 minutes. (Tr. 29, 33; GE 3 at 81.) He did not mention the April 2007 or August 
2007 DWIs, and only discussed the two convictions, disclosed on the SF 85. He stated 
during the hearing: 
 
To my recollection, I believe that we only talked about the two that were 
on there. He didn’t ask any questions about anything else and I didn’t 
                                                          
2 Under the heading “Offense/Action” in Section 16 of the SF 85P, the form lists the term “Law 
Enforcement Authority/Court” twice, leaving space below each heading for information about the location 
of the county and court pertinent to the criminal incident. (GE 2.)  
 
 3 On March 24, 2009, Applicant completed an SF 86. He again disclosed the two conviction dates 
but not the other two arrests. (GE 1.) 
  
 
4 
 
 
realize I needed to tell him at that time or else I would have, I would have 
told him the four dates like is in the second interview on June 16. I thought 
he just wanted to know about the two dates that I put on the form.  (Tr. 
32.)  
 
 On June 16, 2009, Applicant spoke to another investigator, who inquired about 
the two arrests that were not disclosed on the SF 85P. Applicant told this investigator 
that he did not include the two other arrests because they were dismissed and resolved 
in the November 2007 conviction. (Tr. 33; GE 3 at 75-77.) He spoke to this investigator 
for 30 to 35 minutes and gave extensive explanations of the four arrest incidents in 
response to the investigator’s questions. (Tr. 33; GE 3.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
The guideline sets forth a condition that could raise a security concern under AG 
¶ 22 in this case:  
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
In 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged four times with DWIs. Based on 
those incidents, the Government raised a concern under AG ¶ 22(a).  
After the Government produced substantial evidence of that disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation.  
Conditions that could mitigate that concern are provided under AG ¶ 23: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶ 23(a) provides some mitigation because Applicant’s last DWI 
occurred more than two years ago. Since then, he has not been involved in any 
other alcohol-related misconduct and has modified his consumption of alcohol. 
Given his change in behavior since November 2007, his previous pattern of 
drinking no longer calls into question his current judgment. AG ¶ 23(b) also 
provides some mitigation. Applicant acknowledged his imprudent consumption of 
alcohol and no longer associates with the people with whom he previously 
socialized. There is no evidence in the record to support the application of AG ¶ 
23(c) or AG ¶ 23(d), which require participation in formalized treatment programs. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2 that Applicant deliberately falsified answers 
to a question on his February 2009 SF 85P, and failed to disclose information during a 
May 2009 investigative interview. The Government contended that those falsifications 
constituted potential disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
7 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not disclose the information about two 
arrests, but denied that he intentionally misled the Government. When a falsification 
allegation is controverted or denied, as in this case, the government has the burden of 
proving it.  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred.  An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
Applicant’s explanation that he did not intentionally disclose two of the four 
arrests on the February 2009 SF 85P because two of them were resolved in the 
November 2007 conviction was credible. This was the first security clearance 
application that he completed, and on its face, Section 16 of the form does appear to 
limit the inclusion of information to two incidents. Furthermore, he disclosed adverse 
information about an employment termination, lending credence to his explanation that 
he did not falsify his security clearance application. SOR ¶ 2.a is found in his favor.  
 
Applicant’s explanation that he did not disclose the April and August 2007 arrests 
to the investigator in May 2009 because the investigator limited his questions to the two 
convictions listed on the SF 85P is not credible. In listening to Applicant’s testimony, he 
had some concerns about the scope of disclosure when he completed the February 
2009 SF 85P.  Three months later, he had an opportunity to easily discuss those 
concerns and explain that the November 2007 conviction resolved the May 2007 arrest 
and two other arrests. He failed to do so. Instead of erring on the side of full disclosure, 
he chose non-disclosure. That decision raises concerns about his judgment and is 
sufficient to establish disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(b). 
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
8 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
None of the mitigating conditions set forth above apply. Applicant denies the 
allegation contained in SOR ¶ 2.b. He did not admit or disclose the other two DWI 
arrests until confronted with the facts by the second investigator on June 16, 2009. He 
offered no evidence that the misleading information he provided to the first investigator 
was based on improper advice, or otherwise justified. His decision not to clarify or 
explain his answers in May 2009 is the type of behavior that casts doubt on one’s 
reliability and good judgment.   
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:  
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
Applicant admitted that he was arrested for DWI four times, resulting in two 
convictions. The evidence raised said disqualifications. 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
  As described under Guideline G, Applicant’s last arrest for any type of criminal 
conduct occurred in November 2007, more than two years ago. Since then, he has 
changed his friends and alcohol consumption habits. In December 2009, he began 
 
9 
 
 
working for his current employer. He acknowledged that his past misuse of alcohol and 
criminal conduct. The evidence warrants the application of both of the above mitigating 
conditions. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including Applicant’s age, and 
candid testimony. Applicant is an intelligent and motivated 24-year-old man, who 
possesses potential for success in his career.  
 
Applicant began consuming large quantities of alcohol in college and did not 
begin to moderate his consumption until he was arrested for the fourth time in 
November 2007. At this point, Applicant is aware of the potential problems that the 
misuse of alcohol creates, and is careful not to drink and drive. He expressed a 
commitment to his job and to change his alcohol-related behavior. These facts 
represent solid evidence of his decision to mature and pursue a successful career. 
However, his failure to forthrightly mention the April and August 2007 arrests during the 
May 2009 interview is troubling. Although he elaborated on the events underlying the 
May 2007 arrest during that interview, he chose not to disclose the fact that the 
November 2007 conviction, resolved not only the May 2007 arrest, but also the April 
and August 2007 arrests. Those were significant facts to leave out of his explanation of 
the conviction and cannot be construed to be a simple oversight.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for alcohol 
consumption and criminal conduct, but not those arising under personal conduct.  
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
      Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
