                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03571
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jesse Lilly, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access classified information is granted.
Statement of Case
On November 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs).
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 11, 2009, and requested a
hearing.  The case was assigned to me on March 15, 2010, and was scheduled for
hearing on April 14, 2010.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date.  At the hearing,
2
the government's case consisted of ten exhibits GE). Applicant relied on two witnesses
(including himself) and five exhibits (AE).  The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 22,
2010. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline G, Applicant is alleged to have (a) consumed alcohol, at times to
excess and to the point of intoxication, from at least high school to at least May 2008 and
(b) was twice-arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI): (i) in January
2005, to which he pleaded guilty and was fined $300 and ordered to perform ten hours of
community service, complete a DWI screening, and attend a DWI school and (ii) in May
2008, for which he was found guilty and was sentenced to 90 days in jail (suspended),
placed on supervised probation for one year, and ordered to use an ignition interlock for
one year when driving, attend DUI school, perform community service, attend a victim
impact panel, complete an alcohol substance abuse screening program, and make a
$100 contribution to DARE. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He
provided no explanations. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old principal engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married his wife in May 1983 and divorced her in July 2008. GE 1; Tr.
29, 61.  They have two children, ages 23 and 21.  GEs 1 and 2. Applicant earned a
bachelor of science degree in engineering from an accredited university and has been
employed by his same employer since June 1986.  See GE 1; Tr. 28, 33.  He has no
military experience. 
Applicant was introduced to alcohol in high school.  See GE 7.  He continued to
drink at a light to moderate rate between 1979 and 2008. GE 7.  When he drinks, he
typically does so in social settings and estimates he consumes about 3 to 4 beers a
week.  Occasionally, he gets intoxicated from his drinking. GE 7.  Every three or four
months he consumes hard liquor.  He drinks primarily for relaxation with friends and not
for the purpose of becoming intoxicated. GE 7. He has never been diagnosed for
abusing alcohol or alcohol dependency. He consumes alcohol on a light to moderate
basis and commits to avoid abusing alcohol in the future.  See GEs. 5, 7, and  8.
In January 2005, Applicant frequented a local bowling alley in his state of
residence after work to socialize with coworkers. He consumed a couple of drinks.  While
driving home, he was pulled over by local police for speeding. After questioning
Applicant, the officer attempted to perform field sobriety test on him. When Applicant
could not successfully perform the test, the officer transported him to a local station
3
where he was administered an intoxilyzer. See  GE 6. Applicant registered a .11 blood
alcohol content (BAC) level and was charged with DUI and speeding.  GE 5.  He pleaded
guilty to the DUI charge,  and he was found guilty of DUI in September 2005.  See Ges 4
and 5. The court fined him $300, and ordered him to perform ten hours of community
service, complete a DUI screening, and attend a DUI school. See GEs 5 and 6.
Applicant’s documentation reflects his completion all of the imposed court conditions.
See GEs 7 and 8; Tr. 45.
In May 2008, Applicant visited a local tavern after work, where he consumed a
few beers with friends. Tr. 45-46. On his way to meet his wife to celebrate their
anniversary, he was stopped by local police and arrested for DUI and speeding. See
GEs 7 and 9; Tr. 46.  While he had been experiencing some  work-related and family-
related stress in his life, he did not attribute his DUI arrest to stress. Tr. 61-62. 
Applicant pleaded guilty to  DUI in January 2009. See GEs 7 and 10  The court
accepted his plea and sentenced him to 90 days in jail (suspended). The court fined him
$500 (suspended) and placed him on probation for one year. See GEs 4, 7, and 10. The
court also ordered Applicant to install an ignition interlock for one year, attend DWI
school, perform 24 hours of community service, attend a victim impact panel, complete
an alcohol/substance abuse screening program, and pay $100 to a local alcohol-
education program: DARE. See GEs 4, 7, and 10. The court dismissed the speeding
charge. GE 10.
Applicant has since completed all of the conditions set by the court at his January
2009 trial.  See AE B.  He still maintains an interlock device on his vehicle; even though,
he is no longer required to so. Tr. 46-49.  Applicant has received counseling with Dr. A (a
licensed substance abuse counselor) since December 2009. See GE D; Tr. 66. His
employment assistance group referred him to Dr. A for counseling.  Tr. 64, 68.
Applicant sought guidance from Dr. A, not just for his dealing with alcohol, but for
help in addressing his stress levels. Tr. 50-52. Dr. A consulted with Applicant in
December 2009. AE D. He discussed Applicant’s May 2008 DUI incident, but did not
make an alcohol diagnosis. AE E. Dr. A noted Applicant’s therapy attendance (three
times a month) and confirmed that Applicant had not missed any therapy sessions.  AE
D.  Dr. A also noted Applicant’s positive changes in his drinking patterns and sleeping
habits.  AE D.
Alcohol has never affected Applicant’s work performance. See AE A; Tr. 56-57.
With the counseling assistance he has received from Dr. A, Applicant has been able to
reduce his alcohol consumption considerably. He currently consumes alcohol no more
than once a month and is continuing his counseling sessions with Dr. A for the
foreseeable future. Tr. 54-55. 
From his alcohol-related driving experiences, Applicant has learned important
lessons about the risks of drinking and driving. Tr. 50-55. When he does drink, he limits
his alcohol intake to beer.  Tr. 62-63.
4
Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors and co-workers who have worked
with him for many years.  See AE A.  His facility security officer (FSO) characterizes his
honesty and trustworthiness as beyond reproach AE A.  Members of his management
team credit him with honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness.  AE A. His co-workers credit
him with exceptional dedication and professionalism. They cite his volunteer efforts with
key charitable organizations as strong indicia of his good character.  AE A.  
A close friend and counsel sees Applicant several times a year at social functions.
His friend (who also represented him at hearing) has never observed Applicant in an
intoxicated state.  He considers Applicant to be a very responsible person.  Tr.  72-73.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied. The guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following ¶ 2(a) factors:: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, I conclude the following
individual guidelines are pertinent herein:
5
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
See AG ¶ 21.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is a highly-regarded employee of a defense contractor with a history of
recurrent alcohol-related arrests (two in the past five years).  Applicant’s exhibited
alcohol abuse raises security concerns covered by Guideline G of the Adjudicative
Guidelines.  
Applicant’s two alcohol-related arrests covered in the SOR raise security
concerns over his risk of recurrent alcohol abuse. On the strength of the evidence
6
presented, two disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Adjudication Guidelines for alcohol
consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: MC ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away
from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse,
disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” and MC ¶ 22(c), “habitual or
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
Despite the recurrent pattern of his alcohol-related arrests (two over a five-year
period), Applicant has never been diagnosed for alcohol dependency or alcohol abuse
and does not believe he is an alcoholic. He assures that he has reduced his drinking to
occasional consumption since his last DUI conviction in 2008, and his assurances are
corroborated somewhat by his counselor (Dr. A) and his close friend who testified on his
behalf.  Neither indicated any awareness of Applicant’s ever being publicly intoxicated
outside of the two covered alcohol-related incidents.  
Applicant’s lack of any diagnosed alcohol dependency or abuse history provides
support for his claims of reduced drinking since his last DUI offense in May 2008 and are
important considerations in determining what weight to assign to Applicant’s
rehabilitation claims. See ISCR Case 02-03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006); ISCR Case
01-20579, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004). 
With no family history of alcohol dependence or abuse and no additional alcohol-
related incidents since his last DUI incident in May 2008, Applicant has shown
considerable improvement in his use of alcohol. Safe predictions can be made that
Applicant is at no foreseeable risk to a recurrent alcohol-related incident or episode.
Under these special circumstances, MC ¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or the
behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is applicable to Applicant’s situation.   
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, his strong work
record, the applicable guidelines and a whole person assessment of his most recent
alcohol moderation efforts, conclusions warrant that his overall efforts reflect strong
evidence of sustained commitment to a program that provides optimum protections
against recurrent alcohol abuse.  Because of his ability to avert any recurrent abuse
problems in the two years that have elapsed since his last alcohol-related incident, his
two DUI offenses can be considered isolated and unlikely to recur in the foreseeable
future. 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant makes a convincing showing that he
has the resource support at his disposal to avert any recurrent problems with judgment
lapses related to alcohol. Applicant’s mitigation efforts are sufficient to warrant safe
predictions that he is no longer at risk for judgment impairment associated with alcohol
abuse. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the
alcohol guideline of the SOR. 
7
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs.
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):       FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a and 1.b:                    For Applicant 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
