KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline E
DIGEST: In security clearance applications in 2000, 2005 and 2006 Applicant made numerous
false statements. The Judge’s statement that Applicant is an alcoholic who has abused alcohol for
over 35 years is reasonable in light of the record.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-04144.a1
DATE: 07/16/2010
DATE: July 16, 2010
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-04144
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 11, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
2
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 3, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge erred in her findings of
fact; whether the Judge erred in her application of the mitigating conditions; and whether the Judge’s
adverse security clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following discussion, we affirm the Judge’s decision.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a mechanical engineer
for a Defense contractor.  He has a Master’s degree in mechanical engineering.  He has worked for
his current employer since the late 1970s and has held a security clearance since then.  
Applicant has consumed alcohol “to excess and the point of intoxication for over thirty-five
years.”  Decision at 2.  During the mid-to-late-2000s he received counseling from a program
provided by his employer.  In the mid-2000s he also received both in-patient and out-patient
treatment, the former resulting in a diagnosis of alcohol dependence.
In August 2006, the police detained Applicant for being drunk in public.  Although Applicant
was not formally charged with that offense, the incident served as a wake-up call for him.  In 2009
he underwent in-patient treatment for alcoholism, followed by out-patient treatment.  He began
working with Alcoholics Anonymous (AA).  He attends three or four meetings a week and has
completed the twelve steps.  
Applicant has used marijuana, cocaine, and mushrooms in the past, while holding a security
clearance.  He realized that doing so was illegal and contravened both his employer’s and DoD’s
policies concerning drug abuse.  The last time he used marijuana was in 2001.
In security clearance applications (SCA) completed in 2000, 2005, and 2006, Applicant made
numerous false statements.  He variously denied (1) having used illegal drugs within the previous
seven years, (2) having used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance, and (3) having
undergone treatment or counseling as a result of his use of alcohol.  Applicant also falsely denied
drug use in response to DOHA interrogatories sent him in 2009.  
Applicant contends that the Judge made an error in her findings of fact.  Specifically, he
argues that the Judge erred in finding that Applicant had been a heavy drinker at age 14.  We have
examined the Judge’s findings of fact, as well as statements contained in the Analysis portion of the
decision.  Her finding that Applicant had drunk to excess and to the point of intoxication for over
35 years is derived from an allegation in the SOR which Applicant admitted.  Her statement in the
Analysis that Applicant is an alcoholic who had abused alcohol for over 35 years is a reasonable
inference from Applicant’s admissions to the SOR and from the record evidence.  The Judge’s
material findings of security concern are based upon substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶
“[T]he offense is so minor, or so much time as passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under1
such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness or good judgment.”  
3
E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”) 
In support of his appeal, Applicant has cited other decisions by Hearing Office Judges.  We
have given these decisions due consideration.  However, they have significant factual differences
from Applicant’s.  Each case must be decided upon its own merits.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2.
Moreover, Hearing Office decisions are binding neither on other Hearing Office Judges nor on the
Board.  See ISCR Case No. 08-08012 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 20, 2009).
Applicant asserts that the Judge erred in failing to apply Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 17(c)  to1
mitigate Applicant’s falsifications.  The Judge found that Applicant had deliberately given false
answers to the Government on nine occasions over a decade, the most recent occurring in 2009.
Given those findings, the Judge’s failure to apply this mitigating condition is sustainable.  
After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).   
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
