 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00622 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 26, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 12, 2010, and reassigned to me on March 23, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 18, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 26, 
 
2 
 
2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. GE 1 and 2 were admitted 
without objection. Applicant objected to the three credit reports offered as GE 3 to 5 on 
the basis that the reports were out of date. The objection was overruled, and GE 3 to 5 
were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through F, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted documents, which were 
marked AE G through R and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on May 3, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance. He is a law school graduate with a Juris Doctor degree. He married 
in 1997 and separated in 2002. His wife passed away in December 2007. He has a 
nine-year-old child.1 
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts as listed on credit reports obtained in 
2008 and 2009. Four of the debts were medical accounts in the amounts of $658, $410, 
$1,978, and $605. There were two student loan accounts in default for $71,000 and 
$53,000. There was an unpaid judgment of $3,831 for a student loan. Finally, the SOR 
alleged Applicant owed $47,000 for unpaid child support.2 
 
 Applicant graduated college in 1994 and law school in 1997. He funded his 
education with student loans. He has not passed any state bar and is not a practicing 
attorney. He had periods of unemployment and underemployment. Applicant defaulted 
on the student loans. He testified that he started rehabilitating his loans in 2008. He 
entered into a loan rehabilitation program with the U.S. Department of Education in May 
2009. The program consolidated eight loans, including those alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c. The balance of those eight student loans at that time was $168,982. The 
rehabilitation program called for him to make at least nine monthly payments of $1,070 
to bring the loans out of default.3  
 
 The Department of Education notified Applicant in December 2009 that he had 
rehabilitated his defaulted student loans. He submitted a statement from December 27, 
2009, which showed the balance of six student loans at $10,177. These loans appear to 
be the six loans that were included in his rehabilitation program along with the loans 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-29, 39, 46-47, 110; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 GE 3-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-27, 38-39, 69-78, 82-89; GE 1, 2; AE H, K, L, P. Any debts that were not specifically 
alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. They will be used in assessing 
Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the 
“whole person.” 
 
 
3 
 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. The repayment obligation called for Applicant to pay 
those loans by 115 monthly payments of $117, starting in January 2010.4  
 
 Applicant submitted another statement dated December 27, 2009. This 
statement notified Applicant that the “forbearance (temporary suspension or extension 
of payment)” on his loan(s) expired on December 21, 2009. The balance was $114,521. 
The document called for Applicant to pay that amount though 147 monthly payments of 
$1,070, starting in January 2010. It is not completely clear if this refers to one or both of 
the student loans alleged in the SOR, or is another student loan.5 
 
 Applicant submitted a third statement dated January 10, 2010, stating that he 
was approved for an Income Contingent Repayment (ICR) plan in which he would only 
pay the interest that accrues on his loan each month. The first interest payment of $405 
was due in January 2010. The document does not specify what student loans it 
includes. Applicant testified that he believed the interest rate on his loans was 8%. That 
is the interest rate for the six student loans that add up to $10,177. The interest rate for 
the two student loans alleged in the SOR is not included in any of the documents. 
Applicant testified he requested the ICR because his payments of $1,070 caused a real 
“hit” to his savings, and he wanted to have some security for his child. He stated that the 
monthly payments will increase as his income and ability to pay the loans increase.6 
 
 Applicant admitted that he had not paid the $3,831 judgment for a student loan. 
He stated he spoke with the plaintiff’s attorney the week before the hearing. The 
attorney told him the balance due on the judgment was about $8,000. Applicant made 
an offer of $5,000 to settle the judgment. The attorney indicated he would forward the 
offer to his client. Applicant had not heard back from the attorney as of the date of the 
hearing. No additional information on the judgment was submitted post-hearing.7 
 
 Applicant’s wife was sick for a number of years before she passed away. She 
had a growth on her brain similar to a tumor. She had numerous surgeries. It eventually 
started affecting her cognitive functions.8  
 
 Applicant petitioned for divorce in state A where he was living. His wife was living 
in state B at the time. His wife obtained a judgment in state A against him in August 
2005, requiring him to pay $655 per month in child support. The child support order was 
retroactive to January 2003. Applicant stated that he was paying child support before 
the court order, but his wife made false statements to the court in order to obtain the 
court-ordered arrearages. He stated the court ordered him to pay arrearages of about 
$25,000. The court ordered all payments to be sent to state A. State A would forward 
                                                          
4 AE B, J, L. 
 
5 AE I. 
 
6 Tr. at 23-27; AE J, O. 
 
7 Tr. at 37-38, 89-91; GE 2; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. at 31, 34-35, 58; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
the payments to state B, where his wife was living, for disbursement to her. Applicant 
testified that he made the required child support payments through garnishment of his 
wages for about a year until he changed jobs. He stated that he paid state A for several 
months, and then his wife requested that he pay her directly. At that time, he did not live 
far away from his wife. She told him there was a time lag from him sending the money 
to state A, which sent it to state B, before it was forwarded to her. Applicant stated he 
felt sorry for his wife because of her medical condition. He stated that it was obvious 
that she was dying and he felt that he could not deny her request under those 
circumstances. He stated that he had no proof that he paid her because he paid her in 
cash.9 
 
 Applicant received custody of his child upon the death of his wife. Any child 
support arrearages he paid would likely be forwarded to the custodian of his child, which 
is Applicant. He stated that he contacted state A and was told that he was “not in 
arrearage to [state A],” and the balance on his account was zero. Applicant submitted 
an Equifax credit report obtained on March 17, 2010. That credit report continues to list 
the child support debt, and it has grown to $51,436. The address of the child support 
agency listing the debt is not in state A. The address is in state B, where Applicant’s 
wife lived until she passed away. State A has no open case against Applicant for unpaid 
child support. Applicant did not submit any evidence as to the status of the account in 
state B.10 
 
 Applicant submitted documented proof that he paid the $658 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a on April 22, 2010. He also paid another $402 medical debt on the 
same day.11 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. 
The debts are listed on the Equifax credit report obtained on January 13, 2009. They 
are not listed on the Equifax credit reports obtained on October 2, 2009 and March 17, 
2010.12  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. He stated his current financial 
situation is stable. He has an annual base salary of $70,000, with an annual bonus of up 
to $5,000. His child receives annual Social Security death benefits of about $20,000.13 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 27-37, 47-69; GE 2; AE R. 
 
10 Tr. at 27-37, 47-69; GE 2; AE C, D, F. 
 
11 Tr. at 22-23; AE A. 
 
12 Tr. at 39-43; GE 4, 5; AE F. 
 
13 Tr. at 44-46, 78-79, 93, 106; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges that “[Applicant’s] personal financial statement has a negative 
net remainder.” The evidence did not support that allegation. SOR ¶ 1.i is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
7 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant still owes more than $170,000 in student loans and a judgment. He has 
not established that his child support arrearages have been resolved. His financial 
issues are current and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partly caused by his periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. These qualify as conditions that were outside 
her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant rehabilitated his student loans, but the 
amount he still owes is so large that he is only paying interest on the loan. The principal 
will remain, or more likely, continue to grow. He has unresolved child support issues. He 
did not submit sufficient information for a finding that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. 
 
Applicant paid two medical debts. One of the debts was not alleged in the SOR. 
AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. When considering the total 
amount owed on his student loans, his payments to date are insufficient to support a 
finding that he has made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve those debts. AG 
¶ 20(d) is not applicable to his remaining debts. Applicant has not received financial 
counseling, and he has not established clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant disputed owing the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. 
The debts have been deleted from his credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those 
debts. 
 
 Applicant was in arrears for more than $40,000 in child support when his wife 
passed away in 2007. He testified that state A is no longer looking to him for the 
arrearages because he has custody of his child. The child support debt continues to be 
listed by state B on his credit report with a higher balance. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable 
to that debt. The Appeal Board has stated that “even if a delinquent debt is legally 
unenforceable under state law, the federal government is entitled to consider the facts 
and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy 
the debt in a timely manner.”14 Even if states A and B are no longer enforcing this debt, 
it continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. 
 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 07-09966 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008). 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant funded his education using student loans. He graduated law school, 
but has not passed a bar. He was left with a substantial amount of student loans without 
the income to pay them. He is now gainfully employed and has rehabilitated his student 
loans, but he is currently only paying interest on the loans. He stated that his wife lied to 
the court in order to obtain about $25,000 in arrearages on child support. His wages 
were garnished for a period, and then he was required to pay through the state. He 
testified that despite her previous actions, he agreed to pay her child support in cash 
rather than go through the state. At best, Applicant’s actions were foolish. I have 
significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
