                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09–04238
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
July 28, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated March 30, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On January 25, 2010, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 6, 2010, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The case was assigned to this Administrative
Judge on March 11, 2010.  A notice of hearing was issued on March 30, 2010, and the
matter was scheduled for hearing on May 18, 2010.  The Government presented five
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without
2
objection. The Applicant called one witness and presented six exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Exhibits A through F, which were received without objection. The Applicant
testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May
26, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 31 years old, and has a high school diploma and some college.
He is employed by a defense contractor as an Information Technology Specialist, and is
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  He
began working for his current employer in August 2008.  He enlisted in the United
States Marine Corps in January 1998.  He separated from the military in December
2002.  During his military career he worked in a classified area and held a security
clearance.  (Tr. p. 35.)  He admits that he was aware of DoD policy and the law that
prohibited illegal drug use.  He explained that in February 2002, while at a party, he was
drinking heavily when marijuana was offered to him, and he used it.  At the time of the
incident, he was off base, but stationed at a military base.  He subsequently tested
positive for THC on a urinalyses test administered by the military.  As a result, he
received non-judicial punishment, loss of rank, 45 days restriction, and 45 days extra
duty.  (Tr. p. 46-47.)  
The Applicant admits to using marijuana about three times after joining the
Marine Corps and while holding a security clearance.  He states that between 1996 and
2000, he used marijuana a total of about ten times.  (Tr. p. 38.)       
In April 2002, while in the military, the Applicant received a summary court
marital for violating restriction.  The Applicant testified that while he was on restriction
for his marijuana use, he was not allowed to leave the barracks, except to go to work,
eat or worship, and was required to check in at the Battalion office located two miles
away on a daily basis.  He also lost his driving privileges on base.  At one point, he
broke the restriction.  Instead of walking to the Battalion office that was two miles away,
he chose to drive and violate his restriction.  He was caught speeding on base and was
pulled over by military police.  The Applicant plead guilty, and received a loss of rank,
30 days in the brig and loss of pay.  
After serving his time in the brig, the Applicant used marijuana a couple more
times, returned to work, and found out that his separation proceedings had already
started.  (Tr. p. 59.)  He waived the Administrative Separation Board, and received an
Other than Honorable Discharge from the United States Marine Corps.  (Tr. p. 49, and
3
Government Exhibit 5.)  The Applicant admits recklessness at the time and that he
cannot justify his actions in using marijuana while serving in the Marine Corps.  He
deeply regrets his conduct due to the shame it has brought him.
In July 2007, the Applicant was arrested for Battery/Domestic Violence.  The
Applicant testified that his girlfriend with whom he had developed a seven-year
relationship, and who was living with him, had developed a heavy drinking habit.  She
was also diagnosed as bi polar and clinically depressed.  On the day in question, the
Applicant had been consuming alcohol at a baseball game and received hateful text
messages from his girlfriend.  (Tr. p. 72.)  When he got home, his girlfriend was mad,
yelling and throwing things at him.  At one point, she grabbed a knife.  The Applicant
snapped and began choking her until she was losing consciousness.  (Tr. pp. 75 -76.)
When she gained her consciousness, she ran out of the house screaming, “You’re
going to kill me”.  (Tr. p. 77.)  
A subsequent investigation of the matter occurred and the Applicant learned that
he was going to be arrested.  He turned himself in to the authorities.  He plead No
Contest, was found guilty and was sentenced to 10 days jail, which was changed to
work release, 52 weeks anger management, fined and sentenced to three years
probation.  (Tr. p. 80 - 81.)  Applicant currently remains on probation for this offense.  In
January 2010, Applicant’s probation was downgraded from formal probation to
Conditional Revocable Release.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)  Probation will be completed in
December 2010.  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.  
In an interrogatory sent to the Applicant by DOHA dated October 2, 2009, he
listed his last use of marijuana in April 2001.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  He failed to
disclose his more recent use of marijuana that occurred in 2002, two or three times
while awaiting his military separation.  The Applicant stated that he did not intend to
deceive the government concerning his last use of marijuana, he simply made a
mistake on the dates.  (Tr. p. 90.)  He meant to put down that his last use of marijuana
occurred in 2002.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)
A letter from the Applicant’s previous girlfriend indicates that she considers him
to be a hard worker, who is reliable and dependable.  She believes he has benefitted
from anger management classes and has learned from his past mistakes.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit A.)
A letter from the Applicant’s current supervisor states among other favorable
comments that, “During the time I have known [the Applicant] he has demonstrated a
4
solid work ethic, to be of good moral character and concerned for ensuring the customer
is supported in a timely and effective manner.  He has demonstrated a professional
work ethic and is critical in supporting our customers.”  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)
Letters of recommendation from other individuals who know, work, or have
worked with the Applicant, and some who currently hold security clearances, are highly
favorable and consider the Applicant worthy of a security clearance.  (Applicant’s
Exhibits C, D, and E .)
Applicant’s military record reflects that he received Proficiency and Conduct
marks that were above average, a Sea Service Deployment Ribbon and a Certificate of
Commendation.  (Tr. pp. 62, 63 and 67.)  He believes that he has learned from his past
mistakes.  He has completed his 52 weeks of domestic violence counseling and has
been released from formal probation to summary probation.  He believes that he is now
is a much more stable relationship with a woman and his life has settled down.  He is
living with a new girlfriend, who is much more like himself, and they have a three month
old son.  He has a great sense of duty to take care of his son to the best of his ability
and to set an example for him to follow.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)
The Applicant’s current girlfriend testified that she and the Applicant reside
together.  She believes the Applicant is a good father to their son.  She has never
witnessed any misconduct on the part of the Applicant, specifically him using illegal
drugs or becoming violent.  (Tr. pp. 95-96.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses; 
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and
31.(d) individual is currently on parole or probation.
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
6
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct and personal conduct that demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct (Guideline J), and dishonesty and poor
judgment (Guideline E).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope
7
and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his
security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines J and E of the SOR.
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple offenses, 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted, and 31.(d) individual is currently on parole or probation apply.  None of the
mitigation conditions are applicable.  The Applicant’s criminal conduct and questionable
judgment  viewed in total, demonstrates a pattern of misconduct that has continued over
an extended period and last occurred as recently as 2007, when he choked his then
girlfriend to the state of losing consciousness.  This conduct casts serious doubt on the
Applicant’s character.  Additionally, the Applicant remains on probation for the offense
until December of this year.  
      
Applicant’s conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying
Condition 16.(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information applies.  None of the mitigation conditions are
applicable.  
Although I do not find that the Applicant was intentionally deceitful to the
Government in response to his interrogatories concerning his last use of marijuana, I
find his other misconduct and questionable judgment despicable. The offenses
committed by the Applicant over the years are not minor.  His misconduct in the military
that ultimately warranted an Other than Honorable Discharge from the Marine Corps,
and his act of violence against his girlfriend is completely unacceptable.  The
Government relies heavily upon the integrity and honesty of clearance holders.  It is a
negative factor for security clearance purposes if an Applicant engages in a pattern of
misconduct that demonstrates serious unreliability, such as is true with this Applicant.
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.     
8
Given his criminal history, and questionable judgment, the most recent which
occurred just three years ago, in 2007, the Applicant clearly does not meet the
qualifications of an individual that can be trusted with the national secrets.  Assuming
that he now realizes that his immature ways, and his criminal behavior, can no longer
continue, more time is needed to demonstrate that he can be trusted and to ensure the
Government that he will not revert to his old ways.  He remains on probation for his
most recent criminal offense until December 2010.  At this time, the Applicant has not
demonstrated that he is sufficiently trustworthy to meet the eligibility requirements to
access classified information.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guidelines
J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.    
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
