 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00906 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William Bransford, Esquire, and Christopher J. Keeven, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed a security clearance application (SF-86) on 
September 18, 2001. On December 14, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline K, Handling Protected Information, Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On December 22, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. He elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 
29, 2010, and a notice of hearing was issued on March 31, 2010, setting Applicant’s 
hearing for May 3, 2010. I convened the hearing, as scheduled, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced seven documents. Six of 
the documents were marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without 
objection. The Government also provided military directives for administrative notice. 
The Government’s administrative notice documents were marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 1. Applicant did not object to the administrative notice documents. 
 
 Applicant testified on his own behalf and called four witnesses. He introduced 
two exhibits, which were identified and marked as Exs. A and B. Applicant’s exhibits 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on 
May 12, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline K, 
Handling Protected Information; two allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct; and one allegation of disqualifying conduct under Guideline M, 
Use of Information Technology Systems. Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old, married, and the father of four young children. Since 
August 2008, he has been employed by a government contractor. (Ex. 1; Tr. 26-27.) 
 
 Applicant attended college on an ROTC scholarship and received a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Aviation Management. Applicant was commissioned as a U.S. 
military officer and completed basic training before he resigned for health reasons. He 
worked in the private sector for about five and one-half years. He reentered the military 
in July 2000 and advanced to the rank of O-4. He deployed in 2008. He  completed his 
required active service and was honorably separated from active duty in September 
2008. During his military career, he served for over eight years as a logistics officer.  
(Ex. 1; Ex. 2 at 4; Tr. 27-29.) 
 
 In about February 2007, while serving as a military officer, Applicant was 
assigned to serve as a program officer and to direct a testing and evaluation program 
for a military application. Applicant was tasked with significant responsibilities and 
worked in an intense and stressful environment. He worked long hours and traveled 
frequently. During this time, he lived with his family on a U.S. military installation, where 
components of the testing and evaluation program were also located. (Tr. 29-32, 38-39, 
73-75.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
  As a part of his duties during this time, Applicant drafted a security classification 
guide for his program. In August 2007, on a Friday afternoon, Applicant was working in 
a secure facility on the base. He received an assignment to prepare a briefing on the 
status of two vendors in the testing and evaluation program for delivery the following 
Monday morning by the military official who directed the application program. Applicant 
knew that it would be necessary for him to acquire or access certain classified 
documents and photographs in order to complete the assignment. He also knew that to 
complete the assignment on time, it would be necessary to work over the upcoming 
weekend. All of the classified information that he needed to prepare the briefing could 
be accessed from the secure facility where Applicant worked. (Ex. 3 at 1; Tr. 32-35, 74-
79, 109-110.) 
 
 Applicant, however, called a civilian contractor courier assigned to his program at 
an installation about two hours away by automobile and directed him to bring classified 
information, stored on computer disks, to him at the military base.1 The information on 
the disks was accessible on the classified computer network available to Applicant at 
the base. However, Applicant believed that downloading classified material from the 
classified computer network would be slow and difficult. (Ex. 3 at 1-2; Tr. 73-74.) 
 
 When a courier transporting classified information arrived at the base, he or she 
would take the classified information to a secure command site, where it would be 
logged in by a military officer of the day and secured in classified storage. However, 
when the courier arrived at the base carrying the classified information requested by 
Applicant, Applicant directed him to take the classified information to his residence, 
which was located on the base approximately three to four miles from the secure facility 
where Applicant worked. (Ex. 3 at 2; Tr. 75, 110-111.) 
 
 At his residence, Applicant took possession of the classified computer disks from 
the courier. He told the courier he would not sign a chain of custody document when he 
received the classified materials. He acknowledged to the courier that he was breaking 
rules for the receipt and possession of classified information. He directed the courier not 
to tell anyone about his rule breaking. He then directed the courier to return to his 
residence the following day, Saturday, to retrieve the classified documents and return 
them to classified storage at the other installation. (Ex. 3 at 2; Tr. 74-77.)   
 
 On Friday evening, Applicant worked with the classified information at his kitchen 
table. He loaded the classified images and text onto his personal computer. He 
described his actions as follows: 
 
I took the CDs of the vendors---or the ones I needed to have the 
information from, and put them on to an “unclass computer.” It wasn’t 
hooked up to the Internet. It wasn’t turned on, wireless. You know, I 
couldn’t - - I used a personal computer [be]cause my [government-issued] 
 
1 The courier was assigned to the program that Applicant directed. Applicant testified that he had the 
authority to give the courier tasks and assignments. (Tr. 136-139.) 
 
4 
 
 
laptop wasn’t working correctly to copy. I copied those videos, put all the 
CDs back together, burned the new disk, deleted everything off my 
computer, and everything back in the bag, and put it in my filing cabinet.  
 
(Ex. 3; Tr. 80-81.) 
 
 As he worked on the classified materials at his kitchen table, his wife came into 
the room. On February 6, 2008, Applicant provided the following description in a sworn, 
signed statement to an authorized investigator: 
 
I admit that I did show my wife [name omitted] some clearly marked 
“Secret” videos that I had copied from the CDs to my personal laptop. I 
know she does not have any sort of clearance, nor is she a government 
employee or service member. She stopped by the table where I was 
working so I showed her a video and stated, “This is part of the program.”  
  
(Ex. 3 at 2.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant described the same event as follows: 
 
You know, I was sitting there, working, and, you know, my wife came 
around and said, “What are you working on?” I said, “I’m working on- - 
trying to get this done for work, and - - and a video was playing at the 
same time, and I said, “This is my work.” She said, “Oh, okay,” and off she 
went. 
 
(Tr. 81.) 
  
 At his hearing, Applicant denied deliberately showing his wife a classified video. 
He stated that he was playing a classified video as a part of his work, and his wife 
happened to see it as she came into the kitchen and asked about the work he was 
doing. He replied to his wife’s question by identifying the video as a part of his work. (Tr. 
114-116.) 
 
 Applicant was tasked with preparing a classified briefing and unclassified 
materials that could also be distributed. As he prepared the briefing, Applicant had 
access to unclassified photographs of the application that had previously been 
distributed. As he reviewed the classified photographs on the videos he was using to 
prepare the classified briefing, Applicant decided that some of the photographs 
designated as classified had been mismarked. Applicant then cropped the classification 
markings from the classified pictures so that they could be put on an unclassified 
computer network (NIPERnet) and cleared for distribution. He testified that he did not 
have classification authority; he also testified that he thought he had the authority to 
change the classified photographs to unclassified by removing the classified designation 
from the photographs. (Tr. 77-78, 117-120.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 On Friday evening, Applicant used the classified CDs to create smaller CDs 
containing the video and photographs of interest for the briefing. This process took 
about four hours. After completing this process, he deleted the files from his personal 
computer.2 On Saturday, the contractor courier returned to Applicant’s residence to 
retrieve the classified materials and return them to the secure site where they had been 
stored. (Ex. 3 at 2-3; Tr. 113-114.) 
 
 Applicant did not work on the briefing on Saturday. On Sunday, he went to the 
secure site on the base and used secure technology to assemble and complete the 
classified briefing. As a part of that process, he loaded images he created from the 
classified CDs he had placed on his unclassified personal computer onto the secure 
classified network (SIPRnet). He completed the assignment and provided the military 
official with the materials and information he had requested for the Monday morning 
briefing. (Tr. 84-85; 121-122.)   
 
 Applicant testified that as a military officer he had been trained in security 
processes and had worked extensively on the security classification guide for the 
application program for which he served as a testing and evaluation program officer. He 
stated that he knew the rules and knew he was breaking them. He also stated that he 
did not know he did not possess the authority to reclassify or declassify classified 
information until he took a basic information security independent study course in 
September 2009.   (Ex. B; Tr. 85-86, 118-121.) 
 
 There were no immediate negative consequences to Applicant’s actions in 
carrying out the briefing assignment. Sometime after the August 2007 incident, 
Applicant assigned the contract courier to a component unit in another part of the United 
States. At his new assignment, in about December 2008, the courier invited some other 
employees to look at some classified videos on his non-secure laptop computer. The 
other employees informed Applicant of the courier’s actions, and Applicant reported the 
individual to the unit’s security manager. When investigators questioned the courier, he 
told them that Applicant had authorized him to put the classified videos on his laptop 
computer. (Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 87-88, 122-123.)  
 
 Applicant speculated that the videos the courier had on his laptop computer 
contained classified information that was on the CDs that he had brought to Applicant’s 
residence in August 2007. He realized that because the courier had implicated him, he 
too would be questioned and his actions investigated. He drafted a statement about his 
actions in August 2007 that he gave to his program manager. He then met with his 
immediate supervisor and told him what he had done and how he had violated rules and 
regulations for protecting classified information. On November 30, 2007, Applicant’s 
command was informed of his disregard for security requirements. As a consequence, 
Applicant’s access to classified information was removed, his personal computer was 
 
2 Applicant described his actions as follows: “After I had completed downloading the [classified] marked 
photos and videos and burned them to two CD’s, I went ahead and deleted the files, and then emptied 
the recycle bin on my personal computer. I thought the files were completely removed from my personal 
computer.”  (Ex. 3 at 2.) 
 
6 
 
 
confiscated for forensic analysis, and his actions were investigated by a military criminal 
investigation unit. (Ex. 7; Tr. 88-91, 122-124.) 
 
 The forensic analysis of Applicant’s personal unclassified computer revealed the 
“fingerprint” of the classified files he copied to the computer when working in his 
residence in August 2007. Applicant stated that when he deleted the classified files, he 
did not understand that the fingerprint of the classified information remained on his 
personal computer. (Tr. 89-90.)  
 
 On May 5, 2008, Applicant’s command conducted an Article 15 hearing into 
Applicant’s conduct. Applicant received nonjudicial punishment for violation of a lawful 
general regulation (Article 92) and was issued a punitive letter of reprimand. His 
commander’s report cited the following specific facts as determinative in the imposition 
of nonjudicial punishment: “Having access to materials classified as ‘Secret,’ [Applicant] 
violated a lawful general regulation . . . by improperly handling and storing classified 
material on his personal computer as he prepared an official brief for his command.” 
(Ex. 6 a1; HE 1; Tr.39-40.)   
 
 Applicant asserted that he was confident that he would never violate security 
rules again. He discussed the lessons he had learned from his experience: 
 
Just, you know, shortcuts do not . . . save time. [L]ooking back, with the 
number of hours, you know, the disappointment, the regret . . . even my 
wife, who has . . . been aware of this for two and a half years now. . . [T]o 
look at such a poor decision, to derail a career, to save a half a day’s 
work. I mean, it’s just a reinforcement that you just can’t take shortcuts . . .  
[I]f I could go back in time . . . with . . . hindsight, out of a million times I’d 
make the correct choice a million times over. And you know . . . it’s been a 
lesson to me.   
 
(Tr. 107-108.) 
 
  The SOR alleges a number of incidents that raised security concerns under 
Guidelines M, K, and E. Specifically, SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges, under Guideline K, that 
Applicant improperly handled and stored classified information between about August 
11, 2007 until November 30, 2007, in violation of a lawful general military regulation, 
and, as a consequence of this violation, he received nonjudicial punishment under 
Article 92 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). The SOR alleges that this 
conduct also raises security concerns under Guideline E and Guideline M (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. 
and 3.a.). 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant raised security concerns under 
Guideline K when, in 2007, he removed secret classification markings from classified 
photographs without authority so that he could move the classified photographs from a 
classified computer network to an unclassified computer network. The SOR alleges that 
 
7 
 
 
this conduct also raises security concerns under Guideline E and Guideline M (SOR ¶¶ 
2.a. and 3.a.). 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant raised security concerns under 
Guideline K when, without authority, he showed classified material to his wife, who did 
not have a security clearance or a need to know the classified information. This conduct 
is also alleged as a security concern under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 2.a.). 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.b. that Applicant raised a security concern under 
Guideline E when he instructed a contract employee to carry classified information to 
his residence in August 2007, when he knew that the instruction violated procedures for 
protecting classified information, and also instructed the individual not to tell anyone of 
the violation.     
 
 Applicant’s former commanding officer, who presided at Applicant’s Article 15 
hearing, appeared as a witness on his behalf. He stated that Applicant performed his 
military duties very well. He also observed that it was his conclusion that Applicant did 
not intentionally pass classified material to anyone who should not have it. (Tr. 38-43.) 
 
 The president and vice president of the government contracting firm which 
employs Applicant also appeared as witnesses. The president stated that he had met 
and worked with Applicant when he was in the military, and he noted that Applicant has 
been employed by his firm for about two and one-half years. He considers Applicant to 
be a competent employee and a valued member of his team. The vice president praised 
Applicant’s character as “outstanding.” (Tr. 52-66, 167.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor also appeared as a witness. He described Applicant’s 
character as “top notch” and his work performance as “exemplary.” (152-153.) 
 
                                                   Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
8 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 describes the Guideline K security concern as follows: “Deliberate or 
negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other 
 
9 
 
 
sensitive information raises doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, 
reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such information. . . .” 
 
 The SOR Guideline K allegations, which Applicant admitted, raise security 
concerns under the following Guideline K disqualifying conditions: AG ¶¶ 34(a), 34(b), 
34(c), 34(e), and 35(g). AG ¶ 34(a) reads: “deliberate or negligent disclosure of 
classified or other protected information to unauthorized persons, including but not 
limited to personal or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at 
seminars, meetings, or conferences.” AG ¶ 34(b) reads: “collecting or storing classified 
or other protected information at home or in any other unauthorized location.” AG ¶ 
34(c) reads: “loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information  on any unapproved equipment 
including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or computer hardware, 
software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, “palm,” or pocket device or other adjunct 
equipment.” AG ¶ 34(e) reads: “copying classified or other protected information in a 
manner designed to conceal or remove classification or other documents control 
marking.” AG ¶ 34(g) reads: “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of 
classified or other sensitive information.” 
 
 Under Guideline K, there are three mitigating conditions. AG ¶ 35(a) reads: “so 
much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 35(b) reads: “the 
individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now 
demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.” AG ¶ 
35(c) reads: “the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.” 
 
 The incidents that gave rise to security concerns occurred in 2007, and they are 
therefore recent. Applicant’s security incidents did not take place under unusual 
circumstances. Instead, they occurred during the normal course of his work, when he   
willfully carried out actions he knew to be in violation of rules for the protection of 
classified information. Applicant was a career military officer; he knew the rules for 
protecting classified information and chose to disregard them for his own convenience.  
While he has subsequently taken remedial security training and appears positive about 
discharging security responsibilities, he failed to offer a rational explanation for his 
former security violations or to offer credible assurances that the behavior would not 
happen again in the future. I conclude that none of the Guideline K mitigating conditions 
applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  AG 
¶15. 
  
 
10 
 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s failure to comply with rules and regulations 
pertaining to handling protected information also raised security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Specifically, allegations of Appellant’s alleged personal 
conduct related to allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c, which were cross-alleged 
under Guideline E at SOR ¶ 2.a. Additionally the SOR alleged disqualifying personal 
conduct when Applicant directed a contract employee to violate rules for protecting 
classified information and then also directed him not to tell anyone of the violation. 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.)  
 
 Applicant, a career military officer who had been thoroughly trained in procedures 
for protecting classified information, knowingly violated those procedures and directed a 
contract employee not to divulge one of his violations. Applicant concealed his violations 
for several months. He did not reveal his disqualifying conduct until the contract 
employee was investigated for a security breach and implicated Applicant. This conduct 
raises security concerns under AG ¶16(e)(1), which reads: “personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”  
  
 Several Personal Conduct mitigating conditions might have applicability in this 
case. If “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” then AG ¶ 17(a) 
might apply. If “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or if it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. If “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur,” then 
AG ¶ 17(d) might apply. If “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” then AG ¶ 17(e) might be 
applicable. 
 
 Applicant came forward after several months and admitted the conduct he had 
concealed about his security violations, but only after he was implicated by the contract 
employee. Accordingly, AG ¶ 17(a) has limited applicability. Applicant’s security 
violations were not minor, and they occurred recently. They cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he knew the rules and regulations for protecting 
classified information and chose nevertheless to violate them. He provided 
documentation showing that he had taken an independent study course in basic 
security matters. AG ¶ 17(d) therefore has some applicability. However, Applicant did 
not provide evidence to establish that he had taken positive steps to reduce his 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress that was caused by concealing his 
security violations. When Applicant admitted his rule-breaking conduct to his chain of 
 
11 
 
 
command and to his supervisor, he lessened his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. I conclude, therefore, that AG ¶ 17(e) has some applicability to 
the facts of this case.  
   
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 describes the Guideline M security concern as follows: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges at ¶ 3.a. that the Guideline K conduct alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.b. also raises security concerns under Guideline M. In 2007, Applicant 
improperly handled and stored classified information on his personal unclassified laptop 
computer, in violation of a lawful general regulation that he, as a military officer, was 
obligated to comply with. Additionally, even though he did not have authority to classify 
or declassify classified information, Applicant removed classified markings from 
classified photographs in order to move them from a classified computer network to an 
unclassified network. 
 
 Applicant’s actions raise Guideline M security concerns under AG ¶¶ 40(d) and 
40(f). AG ¶ 40(d) reads: “downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on 
or to any unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology systems.” AG ¶ 
40(f) reads: “introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, when 
prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations.” 
 
 There are three conditions that could mitigate Guideline M security concerns.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 41(a) might apply.  
If “the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational efficiency and 
effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s password or computer when no 
other timely alternative was readily available,” then AG ¶ 41(b) might apply.  Finally, if 
“the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a prompt good-faith 
effort to correct the situation and by notification of supervisor,” then AG ¶ 41(c) might 
apply. 
 
 Applicant’s disqualifying conduct, which occurred in 2007, is recent, did not occur 
under unusual circumstances, and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
 
12 
 
 
good judgment. Applicant’s misuse of information technology was not minor, and it was 
intentional. It was not done in the interest of organizational efficiency but to serve 
Applicant’s own purposes. Applicant did not attempt to correct the situation and notify 
his supervisor until he was implicated in the courier’s security violation. I conclude that 
none of the Guideline M mitigating conditions applies to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. His 
former commander and his current supervisor consider him to possess good character 
and to be a diligent employee. As a military officer trained in security procedures and in 
protecting classified information, he chose to violate security rules and regulations to 
serve his own purposes. As a program officer and director of a component unit, 
Applicant also had responsibilities to lead by example and to model good procedures for 
the protection of classified information. Instead, he violated security procedures by 
failing to sign a chain of custody document when he took possession of classified 
information. He then elected to work on classified information in his home, an unsecure 
location, and he directed a courier not to tell anyone that he had violated security rules. 
He concealed his security violations until he was implicated in the courier’s later security 
violation. 
 
I observed Applicant carefully at his security clearance hearing. Applicant was 
clearly concerned that his rule-breaking behavior caused damage to his career. He 
seemed to be less concerned about the impact his rule-breaking had on his unit and 
those who reported to him. While he stated that he would never again violate 
regulations for the protection of classified information, Applicant’s assertions were not 
 
13 
 
 
credible. I am not persuaded that, in the future, he would put the Government’s interests 
before his own in the protection of classified information. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment and his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude 
that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline K, Guideline 
E, and Guideline M. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:                      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.:          Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:          Against  Applicant 
  
Paragraph 3, Guideline M:            AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraph 3.a. :                                Against Applicant 
 
           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
