                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )             ISCR Case No. 09-00041  
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 14, 2008 to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.1  
 
On January 19, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
(Item 1) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 See Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on April 5, 2010. He answered the SOR on April 13, 
2010, and requested a decision without a hearing. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted 14 allegations, and denied the remaining 14 allegations. DOHA Department 
Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)2 in support of the government’s 
preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant 
on May 7, 2010, and he received it on May 13, 2010. He was given 30 days from the 
date he received the FORM to file a response. He did not respond. The case was 
assigned to me on July 20, 2010, for an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He married twice. The first marriage ended in divorce. 
He separated from his second wife in 2008. He is the father of a teenaged son who 
resides with him. Applicant earned a technical certificate in 1993, and worked as an 
aircraft technician for a large commercial airline from 2000 to 2005. He then obtained 
his current job as a quality auditor in April 2005. (Items 5, 7) 
 
 The 28 SOR debts, which appear in Applicant's credit reports of August 2008 
through October 2009, total $18,288. Several of the debts became delinquent in 2003 
and 2004. Applicant denied half of the debts in the SOR. Other than one debt, he failed 
to explain the reasons for his denials. Regarding the one debt that he denied, he noted 
that he consulted the company, but failed to provide any further details. In his response 
to DOHA interrogatories, he noted that he was “working to identify” several creditors, 
and that he planned to try to pay the smaller debts until he could afford to set up 
payment plans for the larger debts. He has not made payments on any of the debts, 
including the 13 debts that are approximately $100 or less. (Items 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11) 
 
 In January 2005, Applicant was laid off from his job with a major airline, where 
his annual salary was $75,000. He could have retained his position if he had moved to 
another state. However, his wife was about to graduate from nursing school. He 
decided to remain in his home state and accept a lower income, because his wife’s 
salary as a nurse would compensate for the loss in his income. From January to April 
2005, he was unemployed. He relied on his severance package and unemployment 
insurance to support his family, which consisted of his wife, son, and his wife’s two 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 11 documents (Items 1 - 11) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
children.3 In April 2005, he obtained a position with his current employer, at an annual 
income of $40,000. Applicant's wife handled the household finances. (Item 7) 
 
 In September 2005, Applicant's spouse was arrested on a charge of prescription 
fraud, and was placed on reduced pay pending the outcome of her case. She was found 
guilty in February 2006, and lost her job and her nursing license. One year later, she 
obtained a clerical job at a salary of $20,000. These events took a toll on Applicant's 
marriage, and in May 2008, they separated. At that time, he was aware that they had 
debts, but did not know the extent of their delinquencies. (Item 7) 
 
 In November 2008, at his security interview, Applicant stated that, once his 
divorce was final, he was considering retaining assistance from a credit counseling 
company. At the time, Applicant had a monthly net income of $2,800 and expenses of 
$2,300, leaving him with a monthly net remainder of $500. In January 2009, he 
consulted a credit counseling company. The financial statement developed by the 
company showed his net income was $2,500 and expenses of $2,800, leaving a 
monthly shortfall of $300. Applicant did not implement the company’s plan because he 
could not afford the monthly payments. He submitted an updated personal financial 
statement with his Answer. It shows income of $2,300, and expenses of $2,110 leaving 
a monthly remainder of $190. (Items 4, 6, 7)  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
3 Applicant provided conflicting information the number of children he supports. In his Answer, he noted 
that he supported himself and two teenaged sons. However, in his April 2009 interrogatory response, he 
stated that he was providing support for “my teenage son, who will grad [sic] In 2010.” 
 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence contained in the FORM shows that Applicant started to have 
delinquencies in 2003. He admits that he is unable to pay his debts. His seven-year 
history of failing to meet his financial obligations supports application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay his debts did not occur in the distant past, because the 
debts are still delinquent. He has not shown that he is in a position where his debts are 
unlikely to recur. His unresolved financial situation casts doubt on his reliability, and AG 
¶ 20a cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is relevant because Applicant's wife committed prescription fraud 
and, as a result, the family was deprived of her income when she lost her nursing 
license and position. These are circumstances that Applicant could not have predicted. 
However, to be applicable, this mitigating condition requires that the person act 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant acted responsibly when he took a step 
toward debt resolution by contacting a consumer credit company. However, he failed to 
follow through on the company’s plan to resolve his debts, or to create and implement 
his own plan. As a result, his debts remain unpaid with no plan in place to resolve them. 
AG ¶ 20 (b) applies in part.  
 
 Applicant’s initial contact with a consumer credit company implicates AG 20(c). 
However, it cannot be applied because Applicant has not set up a payment plan for any 
of his debts nor brought the problem under control. For the same reasons, mitigation is 
unavailable under AG ¶ 20(d). The record shows no evidence that Applicant has paid 
any of the debts alleged in the SOR, including the 13 small debts that are less than $50. 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns about financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence  
 
Applicant is 46 years old and presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He accrued 
significant debt since 2003. In response to the government’s concerns, he offered proof 
that he has contacted a consumer credit company, which developed a plan to resolve 
his debts. However, he could not afford to retain the company. Although half of the SOR 
debts are approximately $100 or less, he has not paid any of them or initiated a plan to 
do so. A fair and common-sense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not demonstrated the good 
judgment and trustworthiness required in those who protect the government’s interests. 
Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such 
doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.bb. Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
