 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06002 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 16, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 22, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on April 23, 2010, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on May 20, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
 
2 
 
were received without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and a demonstrative chart as HE II. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
documents, which were marked AE I through Y and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum is marked HE III. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 1, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2009. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance. He 
attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. He has been married for 11 
years. He has five step-children whose ages range from 17 to 29. One child currently 
resides at home with Applicant and his wife.1  
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts and/or judgments, and a prior 
dismissed bankruptcy action. The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on 
October 23, 2009 and June 9, 2009. Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a - 1.f, and filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. He disputes 
the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g.  
 
 Applicant attributes the delinquent debts to the time when all five children were 
living with Applicant and his wife. This was in 2005. The costs associated with the 
children significantly affected the overall household expenses. Some of the medical bills 
(see SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f) were for the children. Additionally, Applicant was a partner in a 
home remodeling business that was failing because the other partner put the 
partnership in a bad business position. Applicant severed the partnership and 
essentially worked for free for the next three months in order to fulfill existing contracts 
and pay his employees. His wife had recently returned to work after being unemployed 
for six months. Currently, she is a federal employee. Applicant then started his own 
remodeling business that operated for about one year and broke even. However, he 
then had knee surgery that kept him off the job for several months. When he did come 
back, it was after the housing decline and his company went out of business. He had 
difficulty finding steady work for about one year until March 2009, when he started his 
current job.2    
 
 Applicant incurred the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a by using this credit card for his 
failed business. The account went delinquent and the creditor sued Applicant for the 
amount owed. A default judgment was issued against Applicant in the amount of over 
$13,000. In July 2009, Applicant indicated that he would contact the creditor and make 
payment arrangements. As of the date of hearing, Applicant failed to contact the 
creditor. Since the hearing, Applicant contacted the creditor, attempted to negotiate a 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 39-42; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 35-36, 91-94; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
settlement, and paid $300 toward the judgment. No evidence of an executed payment 
plan was offered. 3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a delinquent debt of $1221 owed to a collection company 
collecting on behalf of credit card company. Applicant settled this debt for $597 on May 
26, 2010.4   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a delinquent debt of $190 owed to a collection company 
collecting on behalf of a cellular telephone services company. Applicant settled this 
account by paying $50 on January 12, 2010.5   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a delinquent debt of $172 owed to a collection company 
collecting on behalf of a cable company. Applicant paid this account in full on January 
11, 2010.6    
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent debt of $530 owed to a collection company 
collecting on behalf of a health professional. Applicant paid this account in full on May 
28, 2010.7   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a judgment in the amount of $452 owed to a health care 
service. Applicant believes this is an amount associated with the care of one of his 
children. Applicant provided a copy of the front of his personal check showing a 
payment in full of this judgment on May 10, 2010. However, Applicant also states that 
the check has not cleared his bank as of June 4, 2010.8   
 
 Applicant denied owing the $240 judgment to a county government, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant provided documentation from the relevant county supporting his 
position that he had no arrests there and did not owe any fines or fees. The county’s 
records only go back 10 years and this alleged judgment was recorded in 1994. Neither 
credit report lists this judgment.9  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy action. Applicant admits 
that he filed bankruptcy for debts of about $16,000 in 1995. He further explained that he 
had the action dismissed and paid off the debts.10  
                                                          
3 Tr. at 98; GE 2; AE U. 
 
4 AE K, V. 
 
5 AE L. 
 
6 AE M. 
 
7 AE X. 
 
8 AE E, T. 
 
9 GE 2; AE N, O. 
 
10 GE 5; Tr. at 62-65. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant recently began receiving financial counseling services through his 
credit union. That process assisted in helping him formulate a monthly family budget. 
His personal financial statement showed that he had discretionary income, after all 
expenses, in excess of over $3,000 each month. When asked what he was doing with 
this discretionary income he stated he didn’t know where it went.11   
 
 Applicant is considered a top-notch performer by his employer. He is also viewed 
as an outstanding performer and person by his work supervisor. A character letter 
attests that he is a “good, honest guy”.12   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
11 Tr. at 66-69, 102; GE 2. 
 
12 AE G, H. 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and judgments and was 
unable or unwilling to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant still owes the largest debt (judgment) listed in the SOR with no 
payment plan in place. His financial issues are current and ongoing. However, 
Applicant’s 1995 Chapter 13 bankruptcy is remote and those debts were resolved by 
Applicant. AG ¶ 20(a) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partly caused by his failed business 
ventures and both his and his wife’s periods of unemployment. These qualify as 
conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant acted responsibly 
when he paid the SOR debts listed in ¶¶ 1.b – 1.f. However, he has done little to resolve 
his largest debt (the judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.a), despite having the discretionary 
income to do so and making assurances over a year ago that he would attempt to 
resolve this debt. I am unable to determine that he has acted completely responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling and is using that knowledge to operate 
under a monthly budget. That is a good start. Applicant clearly can benefit from 
counseling and advice on how to manage his money. However, at this point, his 
finances are not being resolved and are not under control. His limited payments to date 
are insufficient to support a finding that he has made a good-faith effort to pay or 
otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable to the debt listed 
at SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 Applicant disputes owing the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.g. His testimony about the 
disputed debts was credible and was supported by corroborating evidence. AG ¶ 20(e) 
is applicable to that debt.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 
7 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s outstanding work performance and favorable character 
evidence. I also found Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. I believe 
he is sincere about getting his finances in order. However, he is not close to reaching 
that point, as evidenced by the minimal effort he has made to resolve his largest debt 
despite having the time and apparent finances to do so. His past financial track record 
also does not breed confidence that he will resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 
8 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.b-1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
