1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04566
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s history of drug involvement generates a security concern. Applicant’s
drug use occurred during his college years. He has not used any illegal drugs in 18
months. Since graduating, he has obtained a job with a defense contractor, where he
has excelled, and he no longer associates with his friends with whom he used illegal
drugs. Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement security concern. Clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On January 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR on February 2, 2010, admitting all of the allegations
and requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2010. On March
24, 2010, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for April 21, 2010. On
April 13, 2010, the Applicant retained an attorney who entered his appearance and filed
for a continuance. I granted the continuance over Department Counsel’s objection and
rescheduled the hearing for May 5, 2010. The hearing was held as rescheduled. At the
hearing, I received three Government exhibits, seven Applicant exhibits, and Applicant’s
testimony. The transcript was received on May 12, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 25-year-old single man. He graduated from college in December
2008 with a bachelor of science degree in computer engineering. Since February 2009,
he has worked for a defense contractor as a software engineer. (Tr. 22)
Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to Applicant’s production lead,
he is “the most productive entry-level engineer [that the production lead] has ever seen.”
(AE A) According to a coworker, he is an “extremely trustworthy, diligent, and efficient
worker who is able to solve complex problems with ease.” (AE B)
Applicant abused illegal drugs while in college, including marijuana, cocaine, and
hallucinogenic mushrooms. He also abused prescription drugs on four occasions. (Tr.
28) Applicant began using marijuana in 2001 as an 18-year-old college freshman. (Tr.
23) He used it once or twice per week. (Tr. 23) He experimented with hallucinogenic
mushrooms once in 2003. (Tr. 24) 
Applicant characterized his marijuana use as a “social thing,” popular with many
residents of his college dormitory. (Tr. 15) In 2001, Applicant was issued a citation for
underage drinking, and was administered a drug test. (Tr. 33) He tested positive for
marijuana and was required to attend outpatient treatment with Narcotics Anonymous
(NA). (Tr. 33) Applicant attended counseling sessions approximately twice weekly for
eight to twelve weeks. Although he did not use marijuana during the sessions, he
resumed it after completing the counseling, using it with the same frequency that he had
used before attending the counseling, through 2003. (Tr. 24, 34)
In 2003, Applicant graduated to cocaine use. He used it approximately once per
week between January 2003 and May 2005. (Tr. 26) He has not used it on a regular
basis since then. However, he did use it once in July 2007 and once in December 2008.
(Tr. 28) His last use occurred around the time of his graduation. He wanted to do it “one
last time” before finishing college. (Tr. 27)
Applicant has not abused any illegal drugs or prescription drugs since December
2008. Since graduating from college, he no longer associates with his drug-abusing
friends. (Tr. 17) In early 2010, Applicant purchased a life insurance policy. (Tr. 19) In
March 2010, the insurance company administered to Applicant a drug test. He passed.
(AE F)
3
In April 2010, Applicant executed a notarized statement of intent not to abuse
illegal drugs in the future. (AE D) That month, he re-enrolled in NA. As of the date of the
hearing, he had attended three counseling sessions between the 18  and 27  of Aprilth th
2010. (AE E)
Applicant is active in the community, participating in a program geared toward
elementary school children that teaches them how municipalities and businesses
operate. (Tr. 35) Also, he volunteers with a charitable organization that strives to reduce
infant mortality. (Tr. 35) Specifically, he helps the organization raise money by
participating in walk-a-thons. (Tr. 36)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant’s history of illegal drug
use triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and 25(c), “illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” Applicant’s failed drug test in 2001
triggers the application of AG ¶ 25(b), “testing positive for illegal use.” Although
Applicant has attended drug counseling over the years, there is no record evidence that
he was ever diagnosed or evaluated as drug dependent. Neither AG ¶ 25(d), “diagnosis
4
by a duly qualified medical professional . . . of drug abuse or dependence,” nor AG ¶
25(e), “evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social worker
who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program,” apply.
Although Applicant’s drug use occurred when he was a college youth, it was
significant. His use of cocaine, the most significant of the drugs he abused, occurred
during the latter half of his college years, and he used it twice between 2007 and 2008
after stopping regular use in 2005. Under these circumstances, his 18 months of drug
abstinence, when considered alone, is not recent enough for AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” to apply.
Nevertheless, Applicant no longer associates with his drug-using friends and has
signed a statement of intent not to abuse drugs in the future. Also, he passed a drug
test, has excelled on the job, and participated actively in volunteer activities since
finishing college. Under these circumstances, I conclude that 18 months constitutes a
sufficient period of abstinence to mitigate the security concern. AG ¶ 26(b), as set forth
below, applies:
a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; [and]
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
Most importantly, Applicant has matured into a responsible adult who performs
exceptionally well on the job, and spends his spare time mentoring youth.
Consequently, under these circumstances, the time that has elapsed since Applicant
last used illegal drugs constitutes an appropriate period of abstinence, and his stated
intention not to use illegal drugs in the future, as set forth in the affidavit he submitted, is
credible.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
5
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s drug abuse was serious. I was particularly troubled by his
continuation of drug use after undergoing counseling in 2001. Moreover, although
Applicant quit smoking marijuana in 2003, he replaced his marijuana use with cocaine
use, and used it on a weekly basis for the next two years. 
Applicant has only used cocaine twice in the past five years. His last use was 16
months before the date of the hearing. Since finishing college, he has excelled on the
job and ended his association with his drug-abusing friends. He now spends his free
time volunteering in the community. These factors outweigh the seriousness of his
conduct, and render the likelihood of recurrence minimal. Considering this case in the
context of the whole-person concept, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
