 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-02723
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On November 26, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a set of interrogatories  to clarify or augment information about1
potentially disqualifying information in his background. After reviewing the results of the
background investigation and Applicant’s responses to the interrogatories, DOHA
adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.3
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 On March 3, 2010, DOHA received a 13-page transcript of the February 23, 2010, hearing. All that was4
discussed at that hearing was Applicant’s request for continuance.
2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified
information. On October 28, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise security concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guideline (AG)  for alcohol consumption (Guideline G) and personal3
conduct (Guideline E).
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on February 5, 2010. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued the same
day, I convened a hearing in this matter on February 23, 2010. Applicant appeared as
scheduled, but he requested the hearing be continued because he did not receive the
Notice of Hearing until the day before. He also averred that, because he did not receive
timely notice, he was unable to arrange to have his lawyer present at the hearing. I
granted Applicant’s request for a continuance. 
Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on April 6, 2010, I re-convened
Applicant’s hearing on April 28, 2010. The parties appeared as scheduled. The
Government presented four exhibits admitted without objection as Government’s
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant testified in his own behalf. I left the record open after the
hearing to give Applicant time to submit additional relevant information. The record
closed on May 6, 2010, when I received Applicant’s 19-page post-hearing submission,
which is included in the record without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. DOHA
received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing the same day.4
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant consumed alcohol, at
times to excess and to the point of intoxication, from 2003 until at least February 2009.
(SOR 1.a) Applicant admitted this allegation. The Government also alleged that
Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in
November 2003, a charge to which he pleaded guilty. (SOR 1.b) Applicant admitted this
allegation. The Government also alleged that, in January 2007, Applicant was arrested
for and pleaded guilty to DUI. (SOR 1.c) Applicant admitted this allegation. Finally, the
Government alleged that, in February 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with
DUI, that he was found guilty, was fined, and that his driver’s license was suspended.
(SOR 1.d) Applicant denied this allegation. The lawyer who represented him in that
case submitted a letter (attached to Applicant’s answer to the SOR) that states
Applicant’s case is on appeal in his county’s circuit court. Also on appeal is the
suspension of Applicant’s driver’s license, which the lawyer opined should be valid.
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant drove “on multiple
occasions” on a suspended driver’s license after he was convicted of DUI in 2008.
3
(SOR 2.a) Applicant admitted this allegation. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in
my findings of fact. Having reviewed Applicant’s response to the SOR, the transcript,
and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 29 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that
requires a security clearance. Applicant has worked for his current employer as an
advanced engineer technician since October 2005. His performance evaluations are
excellent and his supervisor, co-workers, and other associates speak highly of his
reliability, work ethic, and trustworthiness. (Gx. 1; Ax. A) 
When he submitted his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed the DUI arrests alleged in the
SOR. (Gx. 1) In response to interrogatories, he stated that the case from his 2008 DUI
was still pending, but he also stated that his driver’s license was suspended. (Gx. 2) At
the hearing, Applicant acknowledged that his driver’s license was revoked, that he was
still driving at least 150 miles to and from work every day, and that he had previously
driven when his license was suspended following his 2007 DUI arrest. (Gx. 2; Tr. 24 -
25, 45, 47)  
When Applicant was interviewed during his background investigation, he stated
that when he was arrested for DUI in 2003, he was pulled over after leaving a bonfire
where he had consumed several beers. He was on his way to a bar to celebrate a
friend’s birthday when he was stopped. During his subject interview with a Government
investigator, Applicant acknowledged that he should not have been driving after drinking
so much. When he was arrested for DUI in 2007, he had consumed about 11 beers in
five hours while bowling. His driver’s license was suspended after he pleaded guilty to
that charge, but he drove on several occasions anyway. (Gx. 3; Tr. 24 - 25) 
Applicant usually drinks every weekend. Beer is his drink of choice, and it is not
unusual for him to drink 12 beers in one sitting. He estimates it takes about 18 beers for
him to become intoxicated. He defines intoxication as being unable to stand or speak
properly. His blood alcohol content (BAC) when he was arrested for DUI in 2008 was
.17, more than twice the legal limit in his state. (Gx. 3) Applicant stopped drinking for a
few months after his 2007 and 2008 DUI arrests, but gradually returned to his old
drinking patterns. (Gx. 3)
As to the current status of Applicant’s 2008 DUI charge, his lawyer’s letter stated
that the case was on appeal to circuit court. This implies the case was heard in a lower
court, and that Applicant was found guilty. Additionally, Applicant submitted with his
response to interrogatories documents that show he was convicted in district court, that
his driver’s license was revoked, that he was sentenced to 90 days in jail (suspended),
and that he is, in fact, appealing to the circuit court. (Gx. 3) His driver’s license was still
invalid when he appeared to challenge the SOR. (Tr. 24 - 25, 47)
 
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies6
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 21 (Alcohol Consumption) and AG ¶ 15 (Personal
Conduct).
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who7
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8
5
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption
The security concern about Applicant’s use of alcohol, as stated in AG 21, is that:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
The Government presented sufficient reliable information to show, as alleged in SOR
1.b - 1.d, that Applicant has been arrested and convicted of DUI three times in the past
seven years. Available information also shows, as alleged in SOR 1.a, that since 2003
he has consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication. It is not
unusual for Applicant to drink 12 beers in one day. Applicant has engaged in abusive
binge drinking, regardless of whether he drives while intoxicated. Available information
requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related
incidents away from work, such as driving while under  the influence, fighting, child or
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) and AG
¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent).
By contrast, Applicant did not present any information that supports application of
the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 23. His alcohol-related incidents occurred three
times in the past seven years. Four years after his first DUI arrest in 2003, Applicant
was arrested for a second DUI charge. He was arrested a third time, less than a year
after being convicted for his second DUI offense. He still consumes alcohol and has not
demonstrated that he is unlikely to change his use of alcohol anytime soon. He stopped
drinking after his 2007 and 2008 arrests, but returned to his old patterns of alcohol use
a few months later. On balance, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
raised by his excessive use of alcohol and his three alcohol-related arrests.
Personal Conduct
The Government alleged (SOR 2.a) as adverse personal conduct that Applicant
continued to drive despite the fact that his driver’s license was revoked after his 2008
DUI arrest and conviction. Applicant admitted this allegation and acknowledged that he
had also continued to drive after his license was suspended following his 2007 DUI. The
security concern raised by this information, as stated at AG ¶ 15, is that:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
 See footnote 6, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
6
Applicant’s conduct does not fall within any specific AG ¶ 16 disqualifying
condition. His conduct constitutes a criminal offense each time he drives in violation of
the court order that revoked his driving privileges. Such conduct is addressed by the
Guideline J (criminal conduct) disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious
crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted). As such, the Guideline E disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(d) (credible
adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may
not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with
all available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1)
untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other government
protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace;  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; (4) evidence of significant
misuse of Government or other employer's time or resources) (emphasis added) does
not apply.
Nonetheless, Applicant’s knowing and repeated disregard for the court’s order
(that he not be allowed to drive because of his history of driving while intoxicated) is
sufficient to invoke the general security concern under AG ¶ 15. Applicant demonstrated
an “unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations” by driving without a license. In
response, he has not presented information that would support application of any
mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17. Accordingly, he has not mitigated the security
concerns about his personal conduct.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and G. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 29 years
old and presumed to be a mature adult. However, he is either unwilling or unable to
change his use of alcohol so as to avoid future alcohol-related incidents. His willingness
to violate the law by ignoring a state-imposed sanction after his most recent conviction
undermines any confidence that he is a suitable risk for access to classified information.
A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information bearing on Applicant’s9
past and current circumstances shows he has not addressed satisfactorily the
government’s doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s
interests as his own. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved for the Government.10
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
