                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02538 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government, James Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
D, Sexual Behavior, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On January 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
D, Sexual Behavior, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 3, 2010, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on March 25, 2010. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and it was received on April 8, 2010. Applicant was afforded an 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the FORM and he submitted additional material for 
consideration. The case was assigned to me on June 7, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married and 
has two children, ages 15 and 13. He earned a bachelor’s degree and a master’s of 
business administration degree. He served in the Air Force for 21 years and received an 
honorable discharge. He held a Top Secret security clearance for 18 years until it was 
revoked by the Air Force due to misconduct that will be addressed below.  
 
 On February 8, 2005, Applicant was arrested by Park Police on federal property, 
and charged with Disorderly Conduct (Obscene Act). On February 22, 2005, he 
received a letter of reprimand from a Brigadier General for violation of the Uniform Code 
of Military Justice, Article 133, Conduct Unbecoming an Officer; Article 134, Indecent 
Exposure; Article 134, Indecent Acts with Another; and Article 125, Sodomy.  
 
 The arresting officer’s report stated:  
  
 I observed [Suspect] in a kneeling position in front of [Applicant]. [Suspect] 
had his right hand around [Applicant’s] erect penis as [Applicant’s] right 
hand was placed on the top of [Suspect’s] head as [Suspect] stroked and 
performed oral sex on [Applicant]. I moved approximately 15 feet from 
[Suspect] and [Applicant’s] (sic) and [Suspect] stopped performing oral 
sex on [Applicant] and turned toward to (sic) my location still in a kneeling 
position holding [Applicant’s] penis with his right hand. I contacted Sgt. [X] 
[via] cell phone to let him know I had an arrest situation. [Suspect] began 
to cough and gag as he stood up and turned away from [Applicant] and 
started spitting as he left [Applicant’s] location. [Suspect] continued 
walking toward the parking lot as I moved toward [Applicant]. I approached 
[Applicant] and displayed my police badge and identified myself as a 
police officer. [Applicant] stated, “[P]lease let me go I am sorry, I know 
what I was doing was wrong but I am married and I am in the military and I 
will lose my job.” [Applicant] immediately complied and was placed in 
handcuffs.1 
 
 The police officer’s report also indicated Suspect admitted soon after he was 
arrested, to “giving oral sex to the other guy”, that is Applicant. 
 
1 Item 9. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 On June 7, 2005, Applicant was represented by an attorney, and pled not guilty 
before a U.S. Magistrate in U.S. District Court, to a misdemeanor charge of Disorderly 
Conduct. The arresting officer testified at the trial. Applicant was found guilty and 
sentenced to six days in the Bureau of Prisons, two years probation, and a $750 fine.  
 
 In June 2005, an Air Force Board of Inquiry (Board) was conducted to determine 
if Applicant should be discharged from the Air Force. The Board concluded Applicant 
committed serious misconduct due to his civilian conviction, and recommended he be 
retained in the Air Force.  
 
 In February 2007, the Department of the Air Force Central Adjudication Facility 
(AFCAF) issued a Letter of Intent to revoke Applicant’s security clearance. The AFCAF 
set forth allegations under the guidelines for Sexual Behavior, Personal Conduct, and 
Criminal Conduct. Applicant elected a personal appearance hearing before a DOHA 
Administrative Judge.  
 
 At Applicant’s hearing he stated: “First off, let me say, on that day, February 8th . . 
. I did not commit any kind of misconduct in that wooded area that day. I am not a 
homosexual. And I have never done any kind of sexual activity outside the sanctity of 
marriage to my wife.”2 
 
 In her decision the Administrative Judge noted that at his hearing Applicant 
repeatedly denied he committed the alleged conduct. The Administrative Judge 
recommended the Air Force Personnel Security Appeal Board (AFPSAB) sustain the 
AFCAF decision to revoke Applicant’s access to classified information. The AFPSAB 
concurred with the Administrative Judge’s recommendation and denied Applicant’s 
appeal.  
 
 Applicant provided a sworn affidavit on July 23, 2009, to an investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). In his statement he claims when he entered 
the park he was in need of a restroom to urinate. He indicated he did not see a restroom 
and was relieving himself in the woods. He acknowledged seeing Suspect. He stated: 
“At no given time, did the unidentified man ever have any direct physical contact with 
me. No part of my body touched this man and no part of his body touched me.”3 He 
further stated in his sworn statement:  
 
I was informed that I was arrested for receiving oral sex from an 
unidentified male. This is an allegation and there was no truth to this. The 
only thing I did was urinate in the wooded area which I later discovered 
was a federal park.4 
2 Item 6. 
 
3 Id. The police officer also testified at his trial that there were approximately four restrooms in the park, 
including a port-a-john in plain view on the way to the parking lot and wooded area.  
 
4 Item 12. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
* * * 
 
In regard to this incident, I did not engage [in] any sexual act with the 
unidentified man nor have I ever engaged in any same-sex sexual act. My 
spouse [W], mother, [M], and my siblings are all aware of the previously 
mentioned incident.5 
 
* * * 
  
 My spouse is fully aware of all the circumstances surrounding my security 
clearance being suspended and revoked.6  
 
  Applicant’s response to the FORM states: “I committed serious misconduct 
punishable by military and civilian authorities. However, the behavior was a departure 
from my usual and customary behavior. . .”7  
 
 Applicant provided the following comments under the heading: “Guideline D, 
Sexual Behavior-I did commit a criminal act.” He further stated:  
 
 The behavior occurred in a public place thus indicating a lack of 
discretion.8  
 
* * * 
 
 My family, co-workers and friends are aware of my crime that took place 
that day. Everyone is aware and I do not hide from the fact that the crime 
occurred. Many supported me during my trial and continue to support me 
today. I have always performed my job to the best of my abilities. I deny 
that the crime occurred under circumstances which could occur again and 
which could serve as a basis for coercion, exploitation or duress.  
 
In his response to the FORM under the Personal Conduct Guideline he stated:  
 
 It happened over 5 years ago and I have continuously given a voluntarily 
(sic) detail of the events of February 8, 2005. I have given full disclosure 
not only to my employers, but my family and friends as well.  
 
* * * 
 
 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Response to FORM. 
 
8 Id. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 I made voluntary statements to my superiors and everyone involved [in] 
the isolated incident that happened over 5 years ago.  
 
* * * 
  
 I have acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling for myself and 
marriage counseling with my wife. I submitted to evaluations and followed 
all recommendations of the counselor. I went to the VA hospital and I 
reported to the counselor what happened. I asked to be evaluated and 
receive services. I was dismissed without any findings because there was 
no evidence of deviant sexual behavior.   
 
* * * 
 
 Additionally, any statements previously made were at the direction of my 
attorney. I hired legal counsel and was advised accordingly including my 
plea of not guilty.9 
 
 It is unclear what specific behavior Applicant is admitting he committed. For more 
than four years, Applicant repeatedly denied engaging in the obscene act. He denied 
the act under penalty of law at his personal appearance hearing. His most recent denial 
was in a sworn statement in July of 2009. It is unclear if Applicant has acknowledged 
committing the obscene act or merely acknowledges he was found guilty of the offense 
in court. It may be, but cannot be confirmed, that Applicant is acknowledging that the 
criminal act he committed was urinating in a public park.  
 
 It is unclear what specifically Applicant has admitted to his family and friends. 
Applicant provided written character statements as part of his response to the FORM. 
These statements were originally provided to the Board of Inquiry. The letter from his 
wife states: “If I thought one tenth of these accusations were true I would be the first 
person outraged. After all, what he is accused of doing would be a direct assault on our 
marriage vows.”10 I do not know if Applicant has now admitted to his wife that he 
committed the obscene act. Her letter is dated March 3, 2005, and was obviously 
written shortly after the event when Applicant was denying he committed the offense.  
 
 Another letter written on March 2, 2005, from an Air Force colonel stated: “I feel 
that it is unfortunate that the ‘bazzar’ (sic) circumstances surrounding this issue have 
cast a doubt on the service and credibility of [Applicant].”11 I do not know whether 
Applicant admitted to the Colonel that he committed the obscene act.  
 
9 Id.  
 
10 Letters included as part of Response to Form, page 22.  
 
11 Id. at 19. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 A retired colonel provided a letter that stated: “I am aware that [Applicant] has 
been served with a letter of reprimand for homosexual conduct. However, I do not know 
any specifics regarding the alleged acts nor the details of the rebuttal that he has 
prepared.”12  
 
 Applicant repeatedly and continuously denied he participated in the obscene act 
in the park on February 8, 2005. He swore to the accuracy of his denials to an OPM 
investigator on July 23, 2009. He testified under penalty of law at his personal 
appearance hearing that he did not commit the obscene act. His response to the FORM 
is somewhat vague as to what acts he now is admitting to have participated in. 
However, he does admit to committing a serious criminal act.  
 
 I have not been provided with a report from the Veterans Administration that 
details what facts Applicant provided to them regarding the incident. I did not have an 
opportunity to question Applicant to determine what admissions he has made to his 
family and friends. There is no doubt that they are aware of his court conviction. 
However, I do not know what specific crime Applicant now admits he committed and 
what he has told his family and friends.  
 
 I have considered the complete contents of the character letters provided and 
Applicant’s military service, including all of his awards and decorations.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
12 Id. at 24. 
 
7 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior. 
 
Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment, or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
8 
 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Applicant engaged in an obscene act with another man in a public park, where 
he was observed by a police officer. Applicant was married at the time. He was 
arrested, charged, and convicted of Disorderly Conduct (obscene act). He was an Air 
Force officer when he committed the obscene act. I find all of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising under the sexual behavior guideline. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶17 are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.  
 
 Applicant committed an obscene act in a public place with a person he did not 
know at the time. His sexual behavior was not private or discreet. He has repeatedly 
denied, under oath, that he committed the obscene act. Although it has been more than 
five years since the offense occurred, I cannot mitigate the sexual behavior because 
Applicant denied he committed the offense for five years, including during sworn 
testimony at his personal appearance hearing, and in a sworn written statement. In his 
response to the FORM where he now admits to committing a crime, he wrote he made 
the declaration “the 20th of May, 2010, under the pain and penalty of perjury and declare 
that the information contained herein is true.” I find Applicant’s behavior under the 
circumstances casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. His 
statements raise questions about his conduct and credibility and serve as a basis for 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment, of information about one’s conduct 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant committed an obscene act with a person he did not know in a public 
park. He was an Air Force officer at the time. He has repeatedly denied under oath and 
penalty of law that he committed the act, both through testimony and a sworn 
statement. He was found guilty of Disorderly Conduct (obscene act) in a federal court. 
In his response to the FORM, he admitted he committed a criminal act. Applicant has 
gone through great pains for more than four years to deny his past conduct, and he now 
admits he committed a criminal act. Insufficient information was provided to determine 
what information he had admitted to his family and friends. His behavior raises the 
above disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶17 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and find 
the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the secure clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, an such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant has repeatedly denied under penalty of law and in sworn statements 
that he committed the obscene act for which he was convicted. He claims his previous 
statements were made at the direction of his attorney. He now admits he committed 
criminal conduct. I have not had an opportunity to judge Applicant’s credibility in person. 
I have not had an opportunity to resolve discrepancies and question him about the 
statements he has made. I do not know what information or admissions he provided to 
his counselors, family, and friends. It is clear that Applicant’s actions, subsequent 
statements, and lack of candor, are a concern. Although he has sought counseling, he 
failed to describe what behavior he admitted to and he failed to provide the counselor’s 
reports. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was arrested, charged and convicted of Disorderly Conduct (obscene 
act). I find both of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Applicant denied he committed the obscene act for which he was convicted. He 
has maintained that denial for more than four years, including when testifying under 
penalty of law and in a sworn statement. In response to the FORM, he admitted he 
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
committed a crime. I have considered his vague statements and lack of candor. I find 
these issues cause me to question his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant denied his behavior for years and only recently admitted he committed a 
criminal act. I have not had an opportunity to question Applicant and cannot resolve 
discrepancies question him about his statements. Therefore, I cannot find any of the 
above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D, E, and J, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant served in the Air Force 21 years and was honorably discharged. I have 
considered all of the character letters, medals, and awards he received and his work 
performance. Applicant was convicted of Disorderly Conduct (obscene act) in 2005. He 
unequivocally and repeatedly denied in his testimony and sworn statement that he 
committed the act. In his response to the FORM, he acknowledged he committed a 
crime. The record provided includes statements provided by Applicant. I have not had 
an opportunity to observe his demeanor and judge his credibility. Based on the record, I 
have not been able to resolve questions related to Applicant’s candor and specific 
admissions made to his family, friends, and employer. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guidelines for Sexual Behavior, Personal Conduct, 
and Criminal Conduct.13  
13 In reaching my findings, I do not find the consequences of Applicant’s conduct to be disqualifying. That 
is, I do not find the fact that Applicant received a letter of reprimand or that his security clearance was 
 
12 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:   For Applicant  
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   3.b:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
 
revoked by the Air Force as a disqualifying factor, but rather the underlying conduct for which the 
consequences were based is the disqualifying fact. 
