 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )
SSN: ----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-05422
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On March 25, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a set of interrogatories  to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying1
information in his background. After reviewing the results of the background
investigation and Applicant’s responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were
unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.3
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
2
national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information. On
November 23, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which, if proven, raise security concerns addressed in the  adjudicative guideline
(AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). 3
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on April 1, 2010. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on April 6,
2010, I convened a hearing in this matter on April 26, 2010. The parties appeared as
scheduled. The Government presented six exhibits (Gx. 1 - 6), which were admitted
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. I left the record open after the
hearing to give Applicant time to submit additional relevant information. DOHA received
the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on May 5, 2010. The record closed on May 13, 2010,
when I received Applicant’s post-hearing submission, which has been admitted without
objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant accrued
approximately $83,934 for 13 delinquent debts (SOR 1.a - 1.m). Under Guideline E, the
Government alleged that Applicant was arrested for, charged with, or had engaged in at
least nine criminal offenses (SOR 2.a, 2.c, 2.e - 2.k) between 1992 and 2005; and that
he was awarded an Other Than Honorable (OTH) Discharge In Lieu of Court Martial
from the U.S. Army in 2001 (SOR 2.b) for being absent without leave (AWOL) from the
Army, as alleged in SOR 2.d.
In response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR 1.d and 1.m,
and admitted the remaining allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as
facts. Having reviewed the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional
findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 39 years old, and is employed by a defense contractor in a position
that requires a security clearance. Applicant has worked for his current employer as a
truck driver and transportation coordinator since February 2009. (Gx. 1) His
performance in that position has been very good. His most recent performance
appraisal was satisfactory, and he has been formally recognized for his work at least
twice. Co-workers and other associates have praised him for his teamwork, diligence,
work ethic, and enthusiasm for his work. (Ax. A)
Applicant graduated from high school in 1991. After a few years of working in
various jobs, he joined the Army in 1998. He was discharged under other-than-
honorable conditions in April 2001. When he submitted his e-QIP in March 2009, he
indicated he received this discharge because he “[d]id not return for (sic) leave on time,
several times. Each time was only a couple of hours.” (Gx. 1, Section 15) However,
3
Army records obtained during his background investigation reflect that, as alleged in
SOR 2.d, Applicant was AWOL from January 4, 1999, until February 9, 2000. He was
returned to the Army after civilian authorities arrested him on December 7, 1999, for
burglary and assault charges. (Gx. 5; Gx. 6)
Applicant has been married since December 2000, but he and his wife separated
in June 2005. They have not finalized a divorce. Applicant has two children by his wife,
and eight children by other women. Applicant is paying $806 each month in child
support for four of his children. His monthly payments are garnished from his pay by a
state child support enforcement agency. About $200 of each payment is dedicated to a
child support arrearage totaling about $63,943. (Tr. 54; Gx. 4) Applicant disputes the
balance due for his child support, but offered no support for his claim.
Between February 1992 and August 2005, Applicant was arrested eight times.
He was arrested for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute in February 1992, but
the charge was dismissed. (SOR 2.k) In March 1993, he was charged with resisting
arrest and obstructing a police officer. He was convicted and sentenced to six months in
jail and five years probation. (SOR 2.j) In July 1993, he was charged and convicted of
disorderly conduct, for which he was jailed for 10 days and given two years probation.
(SOR 2.I) In September 1993, he was fined and assessed court costs for discharging a
firearm inside city limits. (SOR 2.h) In July 1994, Applicant was arrested for resisting
arrest. (SOR 2.g) In October 1994, he was arrested for assault with a deadly weapon,
but the charge was dismissed. (SOR 2.f) The following month, he was arrested for
carrying a concealed weapon, but this charge was also dismissed. (SOR 2.e) In
December 1999, while he was AWOL, Applicant was arrested and charged with
burglary and assault. This charge was not prosecuted because he was returned to the
Army. (SOR 2.c). In August 2005, he was charged with domestic assault. (SOR 2.a)
(Gx. 5; Answer to SOR)
Applicant has been employed in his current position since February 2009, after
being unemployed for two months. He earns about $19 per hour. Based on a forty-hour
work week, he earns about $3,000 monthly. Before that, he was an over-the-road truck
driver from June 2007 until November 2008. His income in that job varied between $800
and $2,000 monthly depending on the loads he hauled. (Tr. 42) From May 2006 until
November 2007, he earned about $14 hourly at a car factory. (Tr. 40) 
Applicant was unemployed for medical reasons from October 2005 until April
2006. He also had medical problems while employed at the car factory in 2007. (Gx. 1;
Gx. 3; Tr. 41) As a result, he accrued at least seven delinquent debts for medical
services totaling about $1,560. (SOR 1.e, 1.f, 1.h - 1.l) Applicant believes these debts
should have been covered by insurance. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he
submitted undated letters he sent to the creditors listed at SOR 1.f and 1.i - 1.l, seeking
to resolve those debts. (Gx. 2) However, he has not shown that he has actually begun
paying those debts or that his dispute about his medical debts is valid.
Applicant also accrued a delinquent debt of $513 for an overdrawn bank account.
(SOR 1.g) Applicant claims he paid $154 of this debt and that he arranged with the
creditor to pay $88 each month to satisfy the rest of the debt. However, other than an
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
4
undated letter to the bank he included with his response to interrogatories, he has not
corroborated his claims about this debt. (Gx. 2; Tr. 62)
In June 2006, Applicant financed the purchase of a sport utility vehicle (SUV). He
paid the $425 monthly payments on time despite the fact the SUV turned out to be a
lemon. In November 2006, he returned the SUV to the dealer, and has claimed his
understanding at the time was that he did not owe anything further. (Gx. 3; Tr. 57 - 58)
However, a credit report obtained during his background investigation showed Applicant
owed approximately $11,247 to a collection agency (SOR 1.b) to whom this debt was
referred in March 2007. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted an
undated letter to the collection agency seeking to resolve this debt. (Gx. 2) However,
there is no other information that reflects action by the Applicant regarding this debt.
Applicant’s credit history also listed another car repossession debt for $1,524
from March 2009. When Applicant was interviewed in June 2009 during his background
investigation, he claimed he had paid this debt in full in April 2009. (Gx. 3) His claim is
corroborated by a credit report he submitted with his response to DOHA interrogatories.
Applicant also owes $204 for a cash advance loan he obtained in December 2002 (SOR
1.c). In his subject interview, he stated he would pay this debt by the end of 2009, but
he has not done so. (Gx. 3)
Applicant currently supports a woman with whom he lives. Her three children and
one of his own also live with them. They currently are living paycheck to paycheck. He
files his income tax returns on time as required, but refunds are diverted to help repay
his child support arrearage. Applicant thinks he will never be able to repay the
arrearage, as he will be paying support for at least the next 12 years (his youngest child
is six years old) and the arrearage is still accruing interest. (Tr. 67 - 72) His efforts to
resolve his child support arrearage primarily have consisted of asking the mothers of his
children, who reside in four different states, to drop their claims for unpaid support. He
has not been successful in this endeavor. (Gx. 2)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
5
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 18
(Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who6
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The Government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR 1.a - 1.m; that is, that Applicant accrued about $83,934 for 13 delinquent debts
6
over the past seven years. Aside from the car repossession debt at SOR 1.d, available
information indicates his debts, four of which are less than $100 each, remain unpaid as
of the hearing. Accordingly, the record requires application of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶
19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
In response to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant claimed that many of his
debts arose when he had medical problems and when he was unemployed between
2005 and 2007. He also claimed that his medical bills should have been paid through
employer-provided medical insurance. As to his child support obligations, he is still
repaying a significant arrearage through a state-imposed garnishment and will be
repaying that debt, as well as his ongoing child support obligations, for at least the next
12 years. He has no monthly cashflow, and he was unable to document any of his
claimed disputes with his creditors. Despite being steadily employed for the past three
years, Applicant has not been able or willing to resolve even the smallest of his debts.
Accordingly, the record does not support applications of the relevant mitigating
conditions under AG ¶ 20; namely, AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment); AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances); AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control); AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and AG ¶ 20(e) (the
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). The security concerns
about his finances are not mitigated.
Personal Conduct
The Government also presented sufficient information to support its allegations
that Applicant was arrested for, charged with, or had engaged in at least nine criminal
offenses (SOR 2.a, 2.c, 2.e - 2.k) between 1992 and 2005; and that he was awarded an
Other Than Honorable Discharge In Lieu of Court Martial from the U.S. Army in 2001
(SOR 2.b) for being absent without leave (AWOL) from the Army as alleged in SOR 2.d.
Applicant also admitted all of these allegations. The security concern raised by the facts
thus established, as stated at AG ¶ 15, is that:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
 See footnote 5, supra.8
  See footnote 7, supra.9
7
Applicant’s behavior since 1992 constituted criminal conduct. However, most
recently, he was charged in 2005 and 2002 with offenses that were dismissed. Aside
from the admitted fact of his arrest, there is insufficient information in the record to
support a finding that he, in fact, assaulted anyone or burgled anyone’s residence. The
last documented criminal conduct, therefore, was in 2000, when he was AWOL, which
is a criminal violation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice and was the basis for his
OTH discharge. As such, it was not recent and likely not disqualifying under the
adjudicative guideline for criminal conduct. 
Nonetheless, all of the information bearing on Applicant’s conduct since 1992
requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole,
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected
information). Applicant was not candid about the circumstances of his OTH discharge
when he submitted his e-QIP, and he failed to disclose the full extent of his criminal
conduct. Also, he has mismanaged his finances and other aspects of his personal life in
a way that reflect adversely on his judgment and reliability. Given the length of his
misconduct (nearly 18 years) and his lack of candor about his background, there is no
support for application of any of the mitigating conditions under AG 17. The security
concerns raised by his personal conduct are not mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 39 years
old and presumed to be a mature adult. Current references from co-workers and friends
laud his work ethic and dedication, but do not reflect any knowledge of the adverse
information in his background. Further, as noted above, he has not been candid about
his Army service. He also continues to struggle financially, but he has not demonstrated
that he has the ability or willingness to correct his financial problems. Applicant’s long-
term obligations to numerous children and their mothers will further hinder any favorable
change in his circumstances. On balance, a fair and commonsense assessment  of all8
available information bearing on Applicant’s past and current circumstances shows he
has not satisfactorily addressed the government’s doubts about his ability or willingness
to protect the government’s interests as his own. Because protection of the national
interest is the paramount concern in these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved
against the individual and in favor of the Government.9
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.m: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to allow Applicant to have access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
