                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03264 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines B, 
Foreign Influence, and C, Foreign Preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
On January 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 18, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Government amended the SOR on April 26, 
2010. Applicant answered the amended SOR on May 25, 2010. The case was assigned 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
to me on May 11, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 19, 2010. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on June 9, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 17, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, and ¶¶ 2.a through 
2.c. He denied ¶¶ 1.e and 2.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He was born in Denmark. His father is an American 
citizen and his mother was a Danish citizen. His father maintains his U.S. citizenship 
and lives in Denmark. His mother passed away in 2002. Applicant is not married. He 
has one sister who lives in the United States.1  
 
Applicant’s parents met while they were in Africa and his father was in the Peace 
Corps. Applicant spent his time while growing up in the United States and Denmark. He 
attended an international school in Denmark, sanctioned by the U.S. Department of 
State. The children of U.S. embassy personnel also attended this school. He graduated 
in 1996, and was accepted into a prestigious university in the United States. He would 
return to Denmark for vacations during college. He then attended a prestigious 
university in England, receiving a master’s degree, and later attended a university in the 
U.S. and obtained a second master’s degree. While attending a graduate school, he 
studied under a sponsored program in Italy. After completing college, Applicant worked 
for a U.S. company in Australia. He currently works in a job promoting the United States 
and its humanitarian projects.2 
 
Applicant received grants from Denmark to finance his higher education. He is 
not required to repay the grant money. He also received loans from Denmark to pursue 
his graduate education. Applicant also has student loans he received from the United 
States. The majority of his student loans are from the United States. Applicant has two 
foreign bank accounts with small balances. One is a Danish account and the other is an 
account he held in the United Kingdom. They were overdrawn, but the accounts now 
show positive balances.3 Applicant does not have many assets as he is repaying his 
student loans. He does have a modest 401(K) retirement account in the United States.4  
 
1 Tr. 18. 
 
2 Tr. 17-20, 50-53, 69-70. 
 
3 Answer to SOR. His accounts show positive balances.  
 
4 Tr. 27, 58-60, 70-72. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant maintained his Danish citizenship because his father lives there. He 
wanted to be able to address any future medical needs of his father should he become 
ill or incapacitated. He thought it would easier if he maintained his citizenship. However, 
he has stated that he is willing to renounce his Danish citizenship. He has relinquished 
his Danish passport to the facilities security officer (FSO). He also relinquished a Danish 
health insurance card to the FSO. He has traveled in the past through Europe on his 
Danish passport because of convenience. He stated he was unaware it would have 
security clearance implications. He does not believe it in any way negates his loyalty to 
the United States. He registered for the selective service as required in the United 
States. He stated he has not and will not exercise Danish rights and responsibilities 
while maintaining his U.S. citizenship. Applicant last used his Danish passport when he 
visited the Dominican Republic in March 2009. His U.S. passport was to expire in less 
than six months and he was concerned he may have trouble entering the Dominican 
Republic due to requirements that the U.S. passport be valid for more than six months 
before the expiration date. He has always used his U.S. passport when entering and 
exiting the United States. Applicant intends on living in the United States. He obtains all 
of his medical services in the United States. He credibly testified that he does not have 
a preference for Denmark and his allegiance is to the United States.5 
 
Applicant voted in past Danish elections in 2001, 2005, and 2007. He also voted 
in all U.S. elections. He stated he will not vote in any future Danish elections.6  
 
Applicant’s father is a U.S. citizen and a permanent resident of Denmark. Since 
1983 he has taught at the international school where Applicant attended. He has his 
own health insurance card and obtains medical care in Denmark. He owns a home and 
has his investments there. He pays taxes in Denmark. His mother also taught there until 
she passed away. Applicant has regular contact with his father via telephone and email. 
He visits his father approximately twice a year. His father returns to the United States in 
the summer and spends about six weeks at the family summer home. Applicant’s sister 
is also a dual citizen of the United States and Denmark. She resides full time in the 
United States. Applicant has frequent contact with his sister.7 
 
Applicant’s father’s family lives in the United States. Applicant maintains contact 
with his American relatives. He will usually see his American relatives during the 
summer months at the family’s summer home and other times of the year.8 
 
Applicant has two aunts, an uncle, and three cousins on his mother’s side of the 
family who are citizens and residents of Denmark. One aunt is a retired nurse with 
whom he has contact approximately every three months. The other aunt is a retired 
5 Tr. 17, 21-32, 53-58, 61-67, 72-76. 
 
6 Tr. 60. 
 
7 Tr. 17, 20, 25, 33-38, 45-46. 
 
8 Tr. 46-47. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
teacher. His uncle is a retired surgeon. He sees them if he is in Denmark, but does not 
maintain regular contact. Applicant believes, but does not know for certain, that they all 
receive some type of government pension, similar to social security benefits, due to the 
nature of their work. One cousin is a self-employed mechanical engineer. He has 
contact with him about every three months. He likely sees him once a year when he is 
in Denmark. Another cousin is a public health nurse and the third cousin is an executive 
at a consulting firm. He does not maintain telephone or email contact with these 
cousins, and sometimes may see them over the holidays if he is in Denmark, but not 
always.9 
 
I have considered all of the character letters included in the record. Applicant’s 
regional coordinator stated his contribution to her team and the office as a whole, and 
by extension the U.S. Government is tremendous. She stated:  
 
Beyond his subject matter knowledge and technical skills, he is a 
dependable colleague who can be counted on to complete any task 
flawlessly, quickly, and with great humor. [Applicant] has proven to be 
trustworthy, diplomatic, and a great emissary for the humanitarian spirit of 
the U.S. Government. We have been so fortunate to have benefitted from 
[Applicant’s] service to the work of [the organization] for these past years, 
and are counting on his continued collaboration for many years to come.10 
 
 A coworker provided a statement on behalf of Applicant. He has worked with him 
for the past two years. He is considered a valued team member. He has no reservations 
about Applicant’s judgment and commitment to his job. He is highly efficient and 
dependable. He is a highly effective representative of the organization. He has shown 
he is trustworthy, very diplomatic, and devoted to the organization. His performance is 
excellent.11 
 
 Another coworker commented on the fast paced and short fused issues he and 
Applicant were confronted with daily. Applicant would be at work at 4:00 a.m. to read 
over the newest information and put together a coherent report. This allowed senior 
officials in the organization to keep abreast of changing conditions and make informed 
decisions. Applicant willingly goes on short-notice trips and the work he produces is 
consistently top-notch, timely, and thorough. He is consistently reliable, professional, 
and analytical. He willingly goes the extra mile and is a value to the organization. 
Applicant was part of a team that won a superior honor award for his organization, in 
which he was instrumental.12  
9 Tr. 22, 38-45. 
 
10 AE A. 
 
11 Id. 
 
12 AE A, B. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor since September 2008, commented that 
Applicant is a stellar member of the unit and does excellent work. His is one of the 
strongest members of the unit, a gifted writer, and a meticulous editor. He is well liked 
by his colleagues and consistently volunteers for assignments, serves in less-than-
favorable assignments such as night shifts without complaining, has served as an 
official mentor for a new hire, and is a solid role model for more junior members of the 
unit. He supervisor went on to say:  
 
 As his manager, I trust him to carry out his responsibilities quickly, 
professionally, and to the highest standard. More importantly, during the 
time that he has served in the [organization], he has demonstrated loyalty 
to the U.S. Government through all aspects of his job. In all of the 
information products he produced as a member of the [organization], he 
has demonstrated support for the U.S. Government policies and 
procedures. Moreover, he has demonstrated loyalty toward the U.S. 
Government in writing about politically sensitive matters surrounding 
[issues] to foreign countries.13  
 
 Applicant’s most recent performance evaluations rate him as outstanding, which 
is the highest level.14  
 
Denmark15 
 
 Denmark is a constitutional monarchy which has largely ceremonial functions, 
except for the right to appoint the prime minister and cabinet ministers, who are 
responsible for the administration of the government. The constitution established a 
unicameral parliament. The members are elected by a system of proportional 
representation. The regions and municipalities are led by councils that are elected every 
four years. Political life in Denmark is orderly and democratic. Political changes occur 
gradually through a process of consensus, and political methods and attitudes are 
generally moderate. Denmark is a highly developed, stable democracy with a modern 
economy.  
 
 Denmark’s industrialized market economy depends on imported raw materials 
and foreign trade. Within the European Union it advocates a liberal trade policy. Its 
standard of living is among the highest in the world. The United States is Denmark’s 
largest non-European trade partner. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
14 AE C. 
 
15 U.S. Department of State Background Note: Denmark, dated June 3, 2010; U.S. State Department 
Country Specific Information: Denmark, Greenland and the Faeroe Islands, dated February 3, 2010.  
 
6 
 
 
 Denmark has been a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
since its founding in 1949. It has been active in international efforts to integrate the 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe into the West.  
 
 Denmark and the United States have enjoyed a long, close, and mutually 
beneficial relationship. They both consult closely on European and other regional 
political and security matters and cooperate extensively to promote peace and stability 
beyond Europe’s borders. Denmark largely shares the United States views on the 
positive ramifications of NATO enlargement. Danish troops support the stabilization 
efforts in Afghanistan. 
 
 Denmark remains largely free of terrorist incidents. However, it shares with the 
rest of Western Europe, an increased threat of terrorism. In particular, the 2005 
publishing of cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad continues to impact Denmark’s 
relations with the Muslim world and draws attention of extremists to Denmark.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
7 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
8 
 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
Applicant’s father is a U.S. citizen living in Denmark. Applicant’s father teaches at 
an international school in Denmark where many of the U.S. embassy’s personnel’s 
children attend. His father worked in the Peace Corps and met Applicant’s mother. They 
settled in Denmark. He returns to the United States regularly staying in the family 
summer home and visiting relatives. There is nothing to indicate that Applicant’s father’s 
residence in Denmark creates a heightened risk for foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion. Denmark is a close ally of the United States 
cooperating on many global and international issues. There is no indication that 
Denmark exploits its citizens or residents to obtain information.  
Applicant has two aunts, an uncle, and three cousins who are citizens and 
residents of Denmark. The aunts and uncle are all retired.  Applicant does not maintain 
regular contact, but may visit them when he is in Denmark. There is no indication that 
they have close contact with the Danish government. Applicant is uncertain as to what 
type of pensions they have, but believes they likely receive something from the 
government. He has contact about four times a year with a cousin who is a self-
employed engineer. He sees him about once a year. He has two other cousins in 
Denmark, one a public health nurse, the other a consultant. He does not maintain 
regular contact, however, he may see them when he is in Denmark, but not always. 
There is no indication that Applicant’s contact with family members living in Denmark 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. There is no indication that Applicant’s connection to his family or to the 
country of Denmark creates a conflict of interest between his obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person 
or country by providing information. Applicant is a loyal American citizen, who has 
relatives in a country that is a strong ally with the United States. He has strong family 
ties to the United States. Applicant has minimal financial interests in Denmark and they 
do not rise to the level of creating a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. I 
have considered all of the above disqualifying conditions and conclude none apply.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following:  
 
9 
 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country, (6) 
voting in a foreign election; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
Applicant used his Danish passport to enter and exit foreign countries. He 
accepted educational grants and loans from Denmark. Applicant voted in Danish 
elections. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and especially 
considered: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government.  
 
 Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based solely on his parents’ citizenship or birth 
in Denmark. He used his foreign passport to travel for convenience. He also obtained 
educational loans and grants from Denmark. Applicant exercised rights and privileges of 
a Danish citizen while he was also a U.S. citizen. He was not a minor at the time. I find 
AG ¶¶ 11 (a) and (c) do not apply. Applicant is willing to renounce his dual citizenship 
with Denmark. He has surrendered his Danish passport and health card to his security 
manager. I find AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(d) apply. Applicant voted in Danish elections. His 
actions do not fall within the parameters of AG ¶ 11(f).  
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 32-year-old 
professional who is trusted and admired by his coworkers and superiors. He is an 
American citizen. He exercised dual citizenship before he expressed his willingness to 
renounce his Danish citizenship. Applicant was unaware of the security clearance 
ramifications of exercising dual citizenship. He surrendered his Danish passport and 
health card to his security manager. Applicant’s loyalty is to the United States. He 
accepted benefits from Denmark and the United States while he was a student. He is 
repaying both his American and Danish student loans. He also voted in past Danish 
elections. I have considered the totality of Applicant’s connections and foreign 
preference allegations and find they do not rise to the level of creating a security risk. I 
am convinced that Applicant’s past actions do not make him prone to make decisions 
that would be harmful to the interests of the United States. Most of the conduct that 
relates to the foreign preference allegations was while he was a student. Applicant’s 
father is a U.S. citizen and his residence in Denmark does not create a security 
concern. His foreign aunts, uncle, and cousins are citizens and residents of Denmark, a 
country that is a strong ally of the United States. I do not find his contact with them 
creates a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.e:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
