1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06983
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) on March 3, 2010. The SOR enumerated security concerns arising
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
In a March 24, 2010, response, Applicant admitted all 10 allegations set forth
under Guideline F and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA
assigned the case to me on April 16, 2010. The parties proposed a hearing date of May
12, 2010. A notice setting that date for the hearing was issued on April 28, 2010. I
convened the hearing as scheduled. Department Counsel offered five documents,
which were admitted as exhibits (Exs.) 1-5 without objection. Applicant testified and
presented four documents, which were accepted into evidence without objection as
exhibits (Exs.) A-D. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on May 20,
2010, and the record was closed. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions,
 Tr. 42.      1
 Tr. 41.      2
 Tr. 56.      3
 Tr. 53.      4
 Tr. 46-47.      5
 Tr. 75.      6
 Tr. 44-45, 50, 74-75.      7
2
and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden in mitigating security concerns.
Clearance denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old web editor who has worked for the same defense
contractor for over a year. He has an associate’s degree in electronics and
mathematics. Applicant served in the military from 1996 until 2000. He is currently
separated from his wife.
Following his discharge from the military in 2000, Applicant lived with his parents
for about six months, before moving in with relatives in a neighboring state. About eight
months later, he moved to a major metropolitan area, found an apartment, and
acquired a job which would permit him to maintain his security clearance.  He married1
in May 2003, then bought a home at the end of that year for about $155,000. The
house was purchased in Applicant’s name because his wife had credit issues.  A2
second mortgage was obtained in 2005 from the same lender holding the mortgage
used to purchase the house.  It was obtained in the form of a home equity loan of3
approximately $38,000.  The proceeds were used to help finance some remodeling4
projects, replace the furnace, and install a new air conditioner. It also provided sufficient
funds for him to buy a $3,500 car and consolidate some minor debts.5
In September 2006, Applicant discovered his wife was having an affair with one
of his co-workers. The couple separated in November 2006, when his wife and child
relocated. Applicant’s estranged wife did not work for the few months after she left
Applicant. Applicant moved in with his parents in April 2007. Shortly after he was
settled, he put his house on the market. Given the cause of his marital breakup,
continuing at his workplace became untenable.  He ultimately left his place of6
employment in August 2007, leaving a position which paid an annual salary of about
$91,000. He left his job because of personal issues and emotional turmoil, including his
separation and related depression.  7
Applicant thought his retirement fund would provide adequate capital for him to
meet his obligations while he was unemployed. Finding a new job, however, was
difficult. He remained unemployed for about five or six months. Consequently, he fell
 Tr. 54-56. Approximately $9,150 was paid to Applicant’s realtor as commission. There is no evidence the      8
home equity line was considered as forgiven as a result of the sale.
 Tr. 56.      9
 Tr. 49.      10
 Tr. 56-57.      11
 Tr. 65. Applicant now earns approximately $48,000 per year.      12
 Tr. 63-64.      13
 Tr. 66-67.      14
 Tr. 66.      15
3
behind on his mortgage payments for two to three months. While he searched for work,
his house was sold at the beginning of 2008 for about $175,000.  Having only owned8
the home for about four years, Applicant had very little equity in the home at the time of
closing and balances remained owed on his home loans.  In the interim, he relocated9
and met his current girlfriend. The two moved in together, sharing a $950 a month
studio apartment and related expenses.  Applicant does not believe he had any10
delinquent accounts at the time of his relocation.11
Around the same time Applicant moved in with his girlfriend, he started working
for a company in a position paying about $35,000. He began providing about $800 a
month in child support to his estranged wife for their child, and approximately $250 a
month in car payments and insurance. Although he kept his expenses low and had his
mother help manage his bills, Applicant began acquiring delinquent debt.
Applicant first realized his finances were not in balance when he was notified of
an April 2008 judgment against him for $271, a debt originally incurred for emergency
medical treatment. In the interim, he and his girlfriend relocated to mitigate expenses
and find better jobs. After three months of unemployment, Applicant started a new
position around May 2008, earning about $40,000. He and his girlfriend found an
apartment for about $740 a month to share. Despite the relocation and cost cutting,
Applicant found it difficult to make ends meet. He decided to pursue a higher paying job
that could utilize his security clearance. In February 2009, Applicant accepted an offer
to assume his present position, which initially paid about $45,000 per year.  He knew12
at the time that his mounting financial issues could jeopardize the continuance of his
security clearance.  13
Around February 2009, Applicant met with a law firm to discuss his finances.14
Between May 2009 and February 2010, Applicant contemplated bankruptcy protection
under Chapter 13.  His attorney instructed him to “focus on the things [he] needed to15
pay off. . . like the jeep, child support and all those other things and then they would
deal with the remaining debt and . . . work on that when [the bankruptcy petition is]
 Id.      16
 Tr. 68-69.        17
 Tr. 73-74.      18
 Tr. 69.      19
 Tr. 70-72.      20
 Tr. 73.      21
4
filed.”  Applicant needs to pay his lawyer certain sums up front to have his bankruptcy16
petition filed. He currently owes the lawyer about $350-$450.  He is hoping to have that17
balance paid by August or September of 2010, at which point Applicant and his attorney
will decide whether to proceed under Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 of the bankruptcy code.18
In the past year, Applicant and his girlfriend ended their relationship. Applicant
now maintains his own apartment. After monthly expenses and obligations, Applicant
currently retains about $900 each month.  He is using these retained funds to pay his19
attorney and save money to pay off any debts his attorney believes should be paid off
before his bankruptcy filing. Regarding the delinquent debts noted in the SOR,
Applicant was unaware of some of the debts at issue until about May 2009, when he
was interviewed by investigators regarding his security clearance. He has been relying
on his attorney to decide which debts are included in his bankruptcy filing and which
should be satisfied with his current income.  Pursuant to his attorney’s advice, he has20
left issues related to those debts to his legal counsel. There is no evidence of efforts
performed by the lawyer on Applicant’s behalf regarding the debts at issue. Applicant
has not personally tried to work with his creditors or sought professional financial
counseling.21
At issue in the SOR are 10 delinquent debts. Applicant admits that he owes the
debts cited. Those debts include the $271 medical judgment filed in April 2008 (SOR
allegation ¶ 1.a), balances owed related to his home loans for $59,016, $5,900, and
$773 (SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d), a $344 medical collection account (SOR allegation
¶ 1.e), a utilities balance of about $33 (SOR allegation ¶ 1.f), a medical account
balance of $143 (SOR allegation ¶ 1.g), and balances owed to a telecommunications
service for $963, $340, and $1,979, respectively (SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.h – 1.j).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      22
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      23
 Id.      24
 Id.      25
5
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a22
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  23
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access24
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.25
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
 AG ¶ 18.      26
6
Analysis
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  The guideline sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions. Here,26
Applicant acquired 10 debts which raised security concerns. Those debts represent
over $65,000 in delinquent debt. To date, Applicant has neither contacted the creditors
noted nor paid the related balances. Instead, he has relied on his lawyer to either
contact his creditors or advise him as to which debts should be paid. There is no
evidence that the lawyer has exerted any effort regarding the delinquent accounts, or
that Applicant has encouraged the lawyer to actively address those accounts. Such
facts are sufficient to raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC)
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 9(c) (a history of
not meeting financial obligations). With such conditions raised, the burden shifts to
Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant has had a stable job for over a year. Applicant has known about most,
if not all, of the accounts at issue since May 2009, but has taken no action to address
any of the debts at issue. He has only discussed bankruptcy protection with a law firm.
Other than payments made to his lawyer, there has been no further progress toward the
filing for such bankruptcy protection for over a year. When the hearing was convened in
May 2010, Applicant owed less than $500 to his lawyer to file a bankruptcy petition,
although he currently saves about $900 a month after expenses. At that time, he did not
anticipate filing for bankruptcy until August or September 2010. Meanwhile, his
delinquent debts continue to remain unaddressed. Given these facts, FC MC AG ¶
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Learning of his wife’s affair with one of his co-workers not only led to Applicant’s
2006 separation, but also to his leaving a lucrative job in 2007. Since that time, he has
had brief periods of unemployment. Despite these circumstances, Applicant has tried to
minimize his costs and seek more lucrative employment. With regard to the creation of
the debts at issue, these factors are sufficient to raise FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).
There is no evidence that Applicant has received financial counseling, contacted
his creditors, or personally made a bona fide effort to directly address any of the debts
at issue. Instead, he has relied on the prospect of filing for bankruptcy for over a year.
There is no evidence that during the past year his lawyer has made any interim efforts
7
on Applicant’s behalf regarding the debts at issue. To date, those debts remain
unaddressed and the contemplated bankruptcy petition remains unfiled. Given these
circumstances, neither FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) nor FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies.
Applicant provided facts that mitigate the creation of the debts at issue. To date,
however, none of the debts at issue have been addressed. While Applicant stated he
previously was unaware of some of the delinquent debts cited in the SOR, he admitted
he was aware that his finances were of concern when he sought his current position in
February 2009 and that his debts were discussed by investigators in May 2009. In the
intervening year, nothing tangible has been done to address these delinquent debts,
except his discussions regarding the pursuit of bankruptcy. Indeed, of the 10 debts
noted in the SOR, debts as relatively minor as $33, $143, $271, and $344 remain
unaddressed. While some facts may help mitigate the creation of the debts at issue,
Applicant failed to provide facts or evidence related to their satisfaction sufficient to
mitigate security concerns.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Many facts speak in favor of Applicant. He is a credible man who has earned a
college degree and served in the U.S. armed forces. He has made the payment of child
support a priority. Applicant tried to live within his budget after taking a steep reduction
in pay in 2007. He left a lucrative position in 2007 voluntarily, but only after his
workplace became untenable due to the fact his estranged wife had an affair with one
of his co-workers. Since that time, he has earnestly sought to reduce his expenses and
sought higher paying jobs in order to meet his monthly obligations. Aware that the loss
incurred on the sale of his marital home was unwieldy, he sought legal advice as to how
to best address his debt in February 2009.
Since first consulting an attorney regarding bankruptcy, Applicant has made no
demonstrated efforts to address any of his delinquent debts. While his hands-off
approach may be appropriate for one actively and expeditiously pursuing bankruptcy
protection, Applicant’s bankruptcy plans remain unclear. His contemplated filing date
has yet to be established, and the decision whether to proceed under Chapter 7 or
Chapter 13 has yet to be made. In the meantime, there is no evidence that either
8
Applicant or his attorney has made any efforts toward the resolution of the debts at
issue. Although Applicant is earnest in his resolve to address his debts through
bankruptcy, the lack of progress toward such resolution since February 2009 does not
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns raised. Clearance denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
