The Government submitted ten items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02552
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A. Administrative Judge:
On November 4, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
In an undated notarized response, Applicant requested an administrative
determination. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM),
dated March 24, 2010.  Applicant received the FORM on April 5, 2010. On May 25,1
2010, the Director, DOHA, forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative
judge. The case was assigned to me on June 4, 2010. Based on a review of the case
Applicant submitted one check in the amount of $40 (for allegation 1.g)  with his answer to the SOR. The      2
check was dated June 2009.
2
file, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the
security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is currently
unmarried, but has two children from a previous marriage. His first divorce occurred in
2001, and his second divorce occurred in 2005. He has worked for his current employer
since July 2004. (Item 5)
Applicant acknowledged that he has experienced financial difficulties for seven
to ten years. He admitted that he “never forgot about his financial problems.” He states
that he has been through two divorces and has made many bad decisions. He states
that he does not have any credit, and has to buy everything with cash. He wants to pay
everything back, but it will take some time. He attempted to settle one account, but did
not have sufficient income to make the six-month payments. (Item 7) 
The Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleged eight debts totaling $50,755. Applicant
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a, c, e, and f. He has not paid any of these
delinquent accounts. He stated that he plans to pay them after he pays the smaller
debts. Applicant denied the remaining allegations, stating he was making some
payments on them or he had no idea what the debt was. 
Applicant denied allegation 1.b for an account in the amount of $1,102 because
he asserts that he is paying $50 monthly on the account. In his answer to the SOR, he
submitted a slip that showed the account balance as of May 25, 2010 is $852. He also
claimed that he is paying on the allegation in 1.g for $639. Applicant claimed the
balance is $119. However, he did not submit any documentation to support his claim.2
When he responded to the FORM, he stated the account was paid, but he has not
submitted any documentation to prove his claim.
Applicant denied allegation 1.d and 1.h because he has did not recognize the
debt. He did not submit any documentation to show that he has disputed the accounts.
He did not supply any information that he has contacted the creditors or tried to
research these accounts. The credit reports support the delinquent debts for these
accounts. (Items 6, 7 and 8)
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a and b. On his security clearance
application, he answered “No” to Section 27(a) and (b) concerning any delinquent
accounts over 180 or 90 days. During his OPM interview, Applicant acknowledged that
he “willfully and deliberately decided not to disclose his financial problems on his
security clearance application in 2008.”  He stated that “he never forgot about his
financial problems and when he completed his security clearance he should have listed
his financial problems on his paperwork.” (Item 6) 
3
Applicant changed his response to the above allegations in his 2009 answer to
the SOR. He stated that he misunderstood the questions and that he discussed the
financial difficulties with the OPM investigator. In his response to the FORM, Applicant
stated that he did not intentionally falsify any statements or questions. He claims he
misinterpreted some of the questions and did not fully understand what they meant.
Applicant stated that he is not a bad person, “just one of the millions who made
bad judgments and am paying for them every day. He loves his country and would
never do anything to hurt it.” He explained that he does not gamble and has no credit at
all. He noted that he does not live a lavish life. (Item 7)
His annual income in 2009 was approximately $28,000. After expenses and
deductions, Applicant has a monthly net remainder in the amount of $90. (Item 6.)  He
did not indicate any payments to creditors on his personal financial statement.
Applicant admitted his delinquent debts amount to approximately $50,000. They
are composed of debts referred for collection or charged off, and a vehicle
repossession. Applicant did not disclose information as to what kind of expenses gave
rise to these obligations. No indication is given as to whether he ever obtained financial
counseling.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
4
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is3
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion4
is on the applicant.  5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline For Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules
and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
5
classified information.” It also states that “an individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds. 
Here, Applicant admitted that he has significant delinquent debts. To date, those
debts remain largely unaddressed. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts)
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
Applicant’s divorces might have complicated Applicant’s ability to meet his
obligations, but he provided no information about his efforts to otherwise meet those
obligations during that period. He stated that he has had financial difficulties for seven
to ten years, and that he has made many bad decisions. He still has current unpaid
accounts. Consequently Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC) AG ¶
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. As noted, Applicant’s divorces may have impacted his finances.
However, he did not act reasonably under the circumstances. He allowed the
delinquent debts to remain unpaid for many years. There is no record of any attempts
to eliminate his debt until after he received the SOR. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has not provided
evidence of any consistent payment plans. He asserts that he has paid one account,
but has not provided documentation to support this claim. He submitted two checks
dated in June 2009 and nothing more. He claims that he is trying to pay everything
back, but due to limited income it will be some time. Applicant’s failure to disclose
whether he ever received financial counseling obviates the applicability of FC MC AG ¶
20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control).
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
6
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) is a
disqualifying condition. 
On October 16, 2008, Applicant completed his security clearance application. He
indicated that he did not have any debts currently delinquent over 90 days, debts
delinquent over 180 days in the last seven years, or property repossessed by creditors.
This information was false. Applicant knew he had creditors who had not received
payments in over 90 days. He expressly told the OPM investigator that he “never forgot
about his financial problems and when he completed his security paperwork he should
have listed them but did not.” He also stated that “he made a wilful and deliberate
decision not to disclose his financial problems on the paperwork.” AG ¶ 16(a) applies.
In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he did not intentionally falsify
any statements or questions. He replied in his answer to the SOR that he
misinterpreted the questions and did not fully understand what the questions were
asking. He noted that he  told the investigator later in the interview that he was not sure
if the debts were six or seven years old. Applicant’s inconsistent answers regarding this
falsification of his security clearance application do little to support his claim that he
misinterpreted the questions. 
After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude that
none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his
falsification or concealment. He provided no information that indicates he was ill-
advised in completing his SF 86. He has not provided information in this record to show
that he has met his burden of proof for his personal conduct. 
. Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
7
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a mature, single man who has maintained his current employment
for the past several years. He apparently suffered difficulty when faced with two
divorces. He has stated that he intends to pay his delinquent debts, but it will take some
time. Applicant has not demonstrated that his financial problems are resolved, or under
control.
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his
circumstances, articulate his position, and carry his burden in this process. He failed to
offer evidence of financial counseling. He failed to provide documentation regarding
either his past efforts toward addressing his delinquent debts or his future plans for
satisfying those obligations. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only
a scant paragraph of explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain.
Applicant completed a security clearance application in October 2008. He
falsified his answers to Section 27 concerning his financial delinquencies. He admitted
this to the OPM investigator during an interview. He specifically stated that he
intentionally did not disclose the information. He then responded in his answer to the
SOR and FORM that he did not understand the questions.  He also stated that he was
not sure how old the debts were. I do not find his later explanations credible in light of
the inconsistencies. He has not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.
Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.b: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
